## Anchorlogy:  An  Ontology  for  Anchoring Bias  Detection  in  Forecasting

B

Mateus Peixoto 1( ) , Fernanda Baião 1 , Renata Guizzardi 2 , and Giancarlo Guizzardi 2

- 1 Department of Industrial Engineering, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio), Rua Marquês são Vicente 225, Rio de Janeiro 22451-900, Brazil

mpeixoto@aluno.puc-rio.br, fbaiao@puc-rio.br

- 2 University of Twente, Drienerlolaan 5, 7522 NB Enschede, The Netherlands {r.guizzardi,g.guizzardi}@utwente.nl

Abstract. Anchoring bias is one of the most prevalent biases within forecasting. It distorts managers' estimations whenever context-driven intervention to the statistical model output is required. Consequences extend beyond a single organization since forecasting affects order quantity decisions and, therefore, the relations among suppliers, potentially generating a bullwhip effect throughout the supply chain. Anchoring bias can have a significant impact, and despite being related to a numerical value, its detection is very complex. Moreover, it tends to be recurrent when the context that caused the distortion is not explored and precisely understood. Current detection approaches are incomplete, as they do not make explicit the directional component of anchors or their meaning to the decision maker's mental heuristics. In this work, we present Anchorlogy, an ontology devised to explicitly provide the required context to detect and mitigate anchoring bias during a decision-making process, and a metrological approach to measure it while addressing the deficiencies found in other metrics in the current psychological literature. Our proposal was validated by applying it to two case studies in the forecasting domain, and the results show that it effectively prevents the bullwhip effect in real-world scenarios.

Keywords: Anchoring Bias · Ontology · Forecasting · Supply Chain · Cognitive Bias · Bullwhip Effect Mitigation

## 1 Introduction

Demand forecasting is crucial for procurement, production, inventory, logistics, and the overall decision-making process within organizations [ 20]. While numerous quantitative models have been proposed to improve the accuracy of product forecasts [ 2], human judgment (henceforth referred to as judgment ), whether used independently or in conjunction with these models, is still a established practice in forecasting, and well-documented in the literature. Various judgment heuristics or mental shortcuts are employed in the judgmental forecasting process, with over 71% of companies relying on judgmental inputs [ 20].

[FIGURE]

Judgment and forecasting are inherently intertwined. Even in companies that predominantly use statistical forecasting, judgment remains vital in selecting appropriate models, methods, and predictors. Regardless of the sophistication of decision support systems, judgment cannot be completely excluded, as ongoing context-aware performance assessments are essential [ 24]. The primary justification for the prevalence of human interference in the forecasting process lies in the need to incorporate tacit knowledge from the expert, which is not captured by statistical models. These judgmental adjustments are typically made based on intuition, experience, domain- and context-specific knowledge [ 24].

Because of the way judgmental forecasts and adjustments affect agents' beliefs and decision-making processes, several documented cognitive biases are known. Individuals exhibit a persistent tendency to inappropriately anchor their forecast based on an available value and make insufficient adjustments from that anchor [ 12]. Sanders and Wood explain this phenomenon: 'When generating a numerical forecast, humans often start with a reference point or anchor, even if this approach is irrational. Due to the Anchoring Effect , this initial anchor can unduly sway people's estimates' [ 29]. An anchor is defined in behavioral economics literature as the numerical value to which the decision maker gets disproportionally attached [ 29].

However, deliberately setting an informative anchor as a reference point is a typical practice within judgmental forecasting. Common examples are adjusting last month's demand considering the trend of the time series, or toward the mean for an untrended auto-correlated demand time series [ 12]. This facilitates the manifestation of the anchoring bias in the form of insufficient adjustments from the reference, distorting decisions and leading to errors [ 12].

Anchoring bias is certainly one of the most relevant biases that affect judgmental forecasting and adjustment. The internal belief distortions created by the anchoring bias can generate critical impacts not just for a single fi rm, but for an entire supply chain, since sub-optimal decisions taken by a local agent tend to contribute to the generation of a bullwhip effect [ 4, 34]. Implementing a system to prevent the occurrence of anchoring bias is paramount for improving supply chain resilience. Among the reasons for that are: a) the widespread presence of the anchoring bias in the forecasting literature; b) its potential impact on inventory management; and c) the causal relationship between poor decision-making and the bullwhip effect.

Kahneman [ 18] considers judgment to be fundamentally fallible and defines cognitive bias as a systemic deviation from a rational alternative. Zeller et al. [ 35] demonstrate judgement fallibility in certain scenarios. In other words, computerbased algorithms (CBA) can be more reliable than human estimates in certain scenarios, justifying the use of these algorithms as rational alternatives. Managers can be tempted to rely on their fi rst instincts. However, it is crucial to revisit initial impressions to improve reliability [ 23].

Anchoring bias must be addressed to conciliate the best aspects of statistical and human forecasting, aligning the precision of a statistical model (SM) with the domain knowledge and context-awareness of a human decision-maker [ 29]. Considering that Anchoring Bias is numeric by its nature, the aforementioned biases may be detected by an algorithm considered the method used to determine the forecast [ 29] .

This research work takes a step in the direction of providing an anchor detection supporting system . First, we propose an ontology for anchor definition, explanation and detection, named Anchorlogy . This ontology extends existing decision-making ontologies [ 14] [ 27], and is represented using OntoUML, a well-known ontology modeling language grounded on the Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO) [ 16]. Anchorlogy defines what an anchor is, represents different types of anchors, and details how the anchoring bias interacts with the belief formation process. Second, this paper proposes a new measurement for anchoring bias to be used as a detection mechanism while explicitly considering the context. This mechanism allows for automatic detection, thus mitigating the effect of bias on the behavioral component of the decision-making process.

The text is structured as follows: Sect. 2 describes background information relevant for this work, Sects. 3 and 4 respectively describe the proposed ontology and propose a new anchoring bias detection mechanism based on it. Section 5 details the evaluation of applying our proposal in two scenarios, while Sect. 6 poses main conclusions and points to future research directions.

## 2 Background

Behavioral Economics literature presents some interesting fi ndings. Kahneman [ 18] argues there exist two decision-making modes within the human mind: while system 1 is fast, intuitive, and inexact, system 2 is slower, requires deliberation and care before making a decision, and is thus considered rational. Although the occurrence of cognitive biases is typical of system 1, an anchor may occur in both system 1 and system 2.

Schwarz et al. [ 6] state that 'The effect of anchors is one indication that many statements of value and belief are not directly retrieved from memory but, rather, are constructed online in response to a query. (...) Anchoring illustrates this construction because judgments of value and belief are influenced by irrelevant or uninformative starting points present only at the time of questioning' (p. 116). Therefore, the Anchoring Effect interferes with Agents ' Beliefs in an intuitive level, as the so called Priming effect .

Algorithm aversion is described as the innate preference for human-generated forecasts instead of CBA, although the latter is often more accurate than the former [ 9]. Overconfidence bias is another common bias within the fi eld, defined as the tendency of decision-makers to believe that the information they have is more accurate than it is and to overestimate their performance [ 31]. Both algorithm aversion and overconfidence are intertwined biases.

In this work, we assume the so-called Intentional Stance [ 8]. Hence, we interpret artificial systems that enact complex information processes as cognitive agents . In other words, we assume that artificial agents (e.g., an AI system) can bear digital beliefs and intentions (goals) .

## 3 Anchor  and  Related  Concepts

Anchorlogy is structured with two main concerns, namely defining and detecting an anchor. We start by addressing the impact of the anchoring effect upon the beliefs of an agent. Anchorlogy plays a crucial role in conciliating the concepts from forecasting and behavioral economics research since bias definitions can diverge, considering the context associated with the process. Figure 1 depicts Anchorlogy. For references to the OntoUML stereotypes used in this fi gure as well as their semantics, the reader is referred to [ 1, 10, 11, 15].

The core phenomena represented in the model of Fig. 1 relate to the process of Belief  Formation . Beliefs (as well as Desires and Intentions ) are examples of Mental  Aspects [ 13], i.e., certain types of Dispositions [ 16] inhering in Agents [ 13]. We also consider Intuition [ 7] to be a type of Mental Attitude (or mental disposition) and therefore also a type of mental aspect. Here, however, intuitions include more primitive dispositions (e.g., 'gut feelings'), which do not necessarily have a Propositional  Content .

Mental  Aspect  Formations are Mental  Events [ 5] (in which agents participate) that give rise to new mental aspects, i.e., a mental aspect is always created by an event of Mental  Aspect  Formation . These events include Perception  Events , in which mental aspects are created by stimuli originating in the external world (e.g., I perceive that it is not raining outside, which gives rise to my belief that it is not raining outside at this moment). In addition to perceptual events, mental aspects can be formed by events occurring within the agent's cognition. These include processes of deliberate reasoning (system 2 processes) as well as the process of intuitive association (system 1 processes).

Like all events, Mental  Aspect  Formation events are manifestations of interacting dispositions [ 16]. So, existing mental aspects inhering in an agent can influence the manifestations of a mental aspect formation. For example, via logical inference, I can form a new belief based on my existing beliefs.

We are here particularly interested in Value  Beliefs , i.e. the belief that a certain quality [ 16] (e.g., the price of my car) has a particular quality  value (e.g., 20.000 euros) in a particular time  interval (e.g., this month). A Future Value Belief is a value belief whose propositional content refers to a future time interval . For example, I can believe that the price of my car will be of 15.000 euros one year from now. The process of forming future value beliefs is called Value  Forecasting , which plays a role in decision-making since decisions are grounded in preference relations [ 25, 27, 28] created by Future  Value  Beliefs .

To be more precise, a Value  Forecasting is a mental act performed by a Value  Forecaster . A value forecaster can be an Artificial  Agent as well as a Human  Agent . Value Forecasting can be Rational  Value Forecasting or Judgmental  Value  Forecasting . The latter can only be performed by human agents. In contrast, a rational value forecasting can be performed by human and artificial agents alike. A rational value forecasting employs the explicit knowledge of a forecasting  model . So, a Model  Forecasting  Knowledge , like all knowledge, is itself a belief inhering in an agent, but a complex belief (composed of sub-beliefs) and whose aggregated propositional content refers to a forecasting model. A rational value forecasting event includes a manifestation of that model forecasting knowledge. A particular type of rational value forecasting event is Statistical Value Forecasting . In this case, the model knowledge employed is a knowledge of a Statistical  Model . When a rational value forecasting event is performed by a human agent this is called a Rational  Judgmental  Value  Forecasting . Although human agents can perform rational value forecasting processes, they also sometimes perform value forecasting in an intuitive manner. The latter type of event is called an Intuitive  Judgmental  Value  Forecasting and can it include manifestations of intuitions .

Fig.  1. Anchoring Bias Definition Model

[FIGURE]

To better illustrate the aforementioned concepts, consider the following example: Paul is a supply chain manager responsible for deciding how many of each product (SKU - stock keeping unit) should be ordered. To make such decision, Paul should forecast a value for each SKU conducting a Rational  Value Forecasting ; more specifically, he chooses a Statistical  Value  Forecasting , thus relying on a Statistical  Model . Alternatively, Paul could also rely on Intuitive  Judgmental  Value  Forecasting , thus relying on his Intuition ( gut feeling ).

A Time  Series  Belief  (TSB) is a metrologically complex belief composed of a sequence of Value Beliefs ordered by their successive time intervals of reference. The parts of this entity are said to play the (formal) role of Time Series Member .

Further elaborating on the previous example, Paul is deciding how many items to order for an SKU. He has a TSB made of his beliefs of the number of items of this SKU that were sold in previous months (sales numbers). This TSB is composed of multiple sales numbers Time Series Member , ordered in a monthly interval.

A statistical  value  forecasting event employs a Lagged  Time  Series Belief  (LTSB) , which is a particular type of TSB. An LTSB is explicitly created by a Lag Selection event (hence, a mental aspect formation event -although this relation is not shown in the model). A Lag Selection event employs an original TSB and knowledge of statistical model (i.e., a model forecasting knowledge inhering in an agent) and creates an LTSB by choosing an appropriate Number  of  Lags . Typically, an LTSB is a proper part of the original TSB, i.e., the number of lags is typically less than the cardinality of the original sequence. An LTSB is hence historically dependent on [ 10] the TSB from which it was 'extracted'. The number of lags chosen in that selection process becomes a (derived) quality of the LTSB. Every TSB is characterized also by a Times  Series  Variance  (TSV) . If a TSV is a quality inhering in an LTSB then it is called a Statistical  Model  Lag  Time  Series  Variance (SMLTSC) .

Going back to our example, suppose a Lag Selection event of 9 (i.e., Paul decided a Number  of  Lags equals 9). This means Paul uses the last 9 Time  Series  Members of the series in his forecasting. Moreover, a Statistical  Model  Lag  Time  Series  Variance  (SMLTSC) is applied. Paul is here making a statistical  value  forecasting .

A Future Value Belief can be: (a) an Intuitive Future Value Belief , i.e., a future belief created by an intuitive judgmental value forecasting event; (b) a Rational  Future  Value  Belief (not in the fi gure), i.e., one that is created by a rational value forecasting event. A Statistical  Future  Value Belief  (SFVB ) is a rational future value belief created by a Statistical Value Forecasting . A SFVB is characterized by a Statistical  Model  Variance  (SM Variance) but also by a Statistical  Model  Mean  (SM  Mean) . A SFVB is a value belief and, hence, its propositional content refers to a quality value. In the case of a SFVB, that quality value is always the same as the quality value of the SM Mean inhering in that SFVB (not shown in the model).

Some illustrative examples of the aforementioned concepts would be the following: suppose Paul has an Intuition that the next month's demand will be 85. Paul is here making an Intuitive  Judgmental  Value  Forecasting (IJVF) and 85 is an Intuitive  Future  Value  Belief . Now, suppose a certain Statistical  Model has as SM  Mean of 70, as the result of aa Statistical Value Forecasting . We say that 70 is the Statistical  Future  Value  Belief  (SFVB .

Judgmental Value Forecasting (JVF) events can suffer a biased influence from another value belief. A value belief that: (1) deviates from a reference statistical future value belief (SFVB) (i.e., one for the same quality, quality value and time interval), and (2) actually exerts an influence in a JVF, playing the role of an Anchor  Belief in that JVF. That influence relation between an anchor belief and a JVF is termed an anchoring effect (in whose relation the anchor belief is said to play the formal role of an Anchor Bias ). The quality value referred by an anchor belief (i.e., the one that deviates from the quality value of the corresponding SFVB) is called an Anchor (not shown in the model). The degree to which these two values deviate from each other is called a Degree  of Rationality .

In Paul's decision-making process, the value of 85 chosen by JVF (using gut feeling) may be the result of the influence of an Anchor  Belief , with an Anchor equals to 90. Having 90 as an anchor interferes in Paul's decision, making it difficult to move away from 90, so even if the Statistical Value Forecasting results in 70, Paul chooses 85. This is a case of an Anchoring  Bias .

A value belief can be deliberately selected by a value forecaster to play the role of anchor belief in a judgmental value forecasting . In this case, that anchor belief is called a Deliberate  Anchor  Belief . In contrast, an anchor belief that has an anchoring effect in an intuitive judgmental value forecasting (IJVF) event without being explicitly selected is called a Priming  Anchor  Belief . Moreover, IJVF is frequently unconscious. In this case, that anchor belief is said to have a priming effect on the IJVF event. In other words, the has priming effect relation is a specialization (technically, a redefinition) of the has anchoring effect relation for the case of priming anchor beliefs.

If Paul thinks the sales of the upcoming month of November will resemble the one in November of the previous year, Paul may choose these previous sales value as Anchor . Then we say Paul has a Deliberate  Anchor  Belief . Moreover, the Deliberate  Anchor  Belief would make it difficult for his estimate to distance itself from the sales value of the past months of November, thus incurring Anchoring  Bias and distorting his forecast. On the other hand, suppose Paul has an Intuition about the next month's demand, but his estimation is distorted by a given Anchor  Belief . This implies that Paul will be inclined to believe his intuition, attributing it an unreasonably high importance. In other words, Paul's estimation is distorted by an Anchor  Belief .

Finally, a Judgmental  Adjustment event is a JVF event in which a statistical future value belief serves as a reference for 'updating' an existing (human) future value belief. Technically, since we consider the identity of beliefs to be defined by their propositional content, a judgmental adjustment event actually creates a new belief taking into consideration a SFVB (said to serve as adjustment reference ) and an existing belief (said to serve as original value ). The interaction between these two beliefs will create a new belief as the human agent incorporates the context surrounding the initial IJVF to the model. This context is used to adjust from the SFVB reference. Effectively, the access to the SFVB updates the Quality of the original belief, while the context that constructed the human belief alters the Perception of the SFVB, thus motivating an adjustment from the SFVB as the formation of a new Belief .

Now let us move to the concepts related to detecting anchor biases (see Fig. 1). The central concept in this model is the Anchor  Detection event. This is an event performed by an artificial  agent . The goal of this event is to detect whether a JVF event has been biased by another Value  Belief . In other words, this event aims at detecting whether a value belief has played the role of an Anchor  Belief w.r.t. to that JVF event. In addition, it aims at finding out what type of anchor belief belongs to (see discussion below). To do this, the Artificial Agent performing Anchor Detection takes into consideration the following items:

- -the potentially biased Future  Value  Belief (termed here a judgmental value );
- -a Statistical  Future  Value  Belief (having a particular SM  Variance -Statistical Model Variance) as reference value . This reference is produced by a Statistical  Value  Forecasting event aimed to predict a quality value to the same quality and for the same time  interval ;
- -a Lagged  Time  Series  Belief  (LTSB) (having a particular SMLTSC ), which the Value  Forecaster took into consideration when forecasting that future value in a process of Statistical  Judgmental  Value  Forecasting . As previously discussed, an LTSB is a sequence of future value beliefs

( belief time series members ) ordered by their associated intervals. The members of this structure are potential anchors ;

- -the Knowledge  of  Anchor  Belief  types . Anchor beliefs instantiate different Anchor  Belief  Types (see discussion below).

In other words, an anchor detection event is a manifestation of these beliefs. Moreover, it is a Mental  Aspect  Formation event, i.e., it creates a new belief inhering in the artificial agent performing that detection event. We call this belief Anchor  Belief  Detected  (ABD) . An ABD is the belief an artificial agent bears about a value belief is an anchor  belief of a given Anchor  Belief Type .

We consider here four different types (technically, roles) that a value belief acting as an anchor bias can instantiate. The instances of all these types must, of course, also satisfy all the general conditions for being an anchor belief, i.e., having an anchoring effect on a JVF event, and significantly deviating from a reference value. In the sequel, we discuss these different anchor belief types:

- -Naive  Anchor  Belief : to play this role, a value belief has to be an anchor belief, and it has to be the last (more recent) time series member of the LTSB under consideration. Moreover, this LTSB must be composed of value beliefs referring to the same quality. We consider here that the Value Beliefs in a Time  Series  Belief refer to the same quality which, despite changing qualitatively in time, preserves its identity. For example, the amount of laptops in my warehouse this month is taken to refer to a quality inhering in a collective entity ( my laptop collection ). This quality can take different values in time, but it stays numerically the same. When considering the number of laptop sales both in January and February, we are technically talking about two different qualities that inhere in two different complex events; namely, the aggregated sales of January; the aggregated sales of February. So, in this case, we should talk about qualities of the same kind. For the sake of simplicity, we here neglect this distinctions but without any lost of generality. For example, when predicting the number of pens I should buy next month, I could be biased by the number of pens I bought last month;
- -Sequence  Anchor : to play this role, a value belief has to be an anchor belief, and it has to be the last (more recent) time series member of the LTSB under consideration. However, this must be an LTSB composed of qualities of a different type. For example, when predicting the number of pens I should buy next month, I could be biased by the number of pencils I just decided to buy for this month;
- -Seasonal  Value  Belief : in other to play this role, a value belief has to be an anchor belief and it has to a value belief for the same quality and for a qualitatively equivalent time interval in the past. For example, when predicting the number of pens I should buy next July, I could be biased by the number of pens I bought last July;
- -Overconfidence  Anchor  Belief : in a Judgmental  Adjustment event, a value forecaster can take into consideration a Rational  Future  Value

Belief as a reference in order to consider updating their belief about a future value belief they have. We have an overconfidence anchor belief when that future value belief - despite significantly deviating from a reference value causes that forecaster to override that belief updating event, thus, maintaining their own original prediction. In other words, that future value belief works as an overconfidence anchor belief in the judgmental adjustment event that correct its own associated quality value (i.e., its own prediction).

## 4 Anchoring  Bias  Detection  Mechanism

Anchoring bias is typically measured with control groups. In other words, the group of references is split in two. Then, a group of experts are consulted before the stimuli, and the median of their decisions and variance serve as a reference for the inference of bias by the other group. However, this presents a fragile perspective to neutrality since the biases of the control group participants are never taken into account [ 6]. The measurements and notion of a biased response derive solely from the deviation of the rational alternative [ 33] this is insufficient considering the forecasting context. The most accurate SM should be used as the reference for rational decision-making since it is the CBA most likely to outperform the judgmental forecaster. The limitations of the previous measurement [ 21] are manifested in two main deficiencies: a) the definition of bias is only the deviation from the rational point, not taking into account the directional components of the anchor, and b) the lack of a clear threshold for bias detection. As aforementioned, it is important to use the SMLTSV 1 and SMV to ensure a fair comparison for model performance, that is, its ability to reduce the SMLTSV variance is relevant when determining the importance that should be given to it. We created a new measurement as shown in (1), where PA is the potential anchor; SMM is the SM's mean; and I is the input of the decision support system used by the decision maker.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As can be seen, the relevance of any adjustment toward the anchor is mediated by the natural variance of the time series proportional to the number of points needed to construct the performance of the SM. This way, the directional component of the anchor is respected, and a clear threshold is established by giving more relative preference to the Anchor than the SM . It is important to note that a test should be performed for each potential anchor considering the SMM. Random external values may distort decision-making while not being part of any of the main anchor types documented by the literature. An arbitrary threshold is established, warning if there is a distortion greater than 20% from the SM  Mean .

1 In the remainder of the paper, we use the name of qualities such SMLTSV, SMV or SMM as a shortcut to refer to their measured values.

The anchor detection test (ADT) is formulated to receive the following inputs: The SM mean (SMM) and variance, the SM lag time series variance (SMLTSV), a list of potential anchors (LPA) and another list of their respective anchor types (LAT), and the suggestion of decision made by the user, denoted by the input(I).

List of variables: I= Input of the user, LPA = List of Potential Anchors, LAT = List of Anchor Types, SMM = Statistical Model Mean, SMV= Statistical Model Variance, SMLTSV = Statistical Lag Time Series

```
Model Variance. Input Data [I, LPA, LAT, SMM, SMV, SMLTSV]; Output Data[Anchor List(AL) = [Anchor, Anchor type]]; for element(el) in LPA do if | el -I | < SMV then AL ← [ el,  LAT ( el )] ; else if | el -I | < | SM M -I | then If | el -I | √ SM LT SV -| SM M -I | √ SM V ≤ 0; AL ← [ el,  LAT ( el )] end end if | I -SM M | > SM V 5 then AL ← "Considerable deviation detected" end end
```

Algorithm 1: Anchor Detection Mechanism

As illustrated in Algorithm 1, the fi rst step is to verify if the distance between each potential anchor and the decision is smaller than the SM variance (SMV). This is relevant because the SMV represents the expected error of the SM, and therefore, if the distance between the input and the potential anchor is smaller than the variance of the SM, it would imply the proximity to the potential anchor is more precise as a forecast than the output of the SM. In other words, this confirms that the potential anchor is in fact, an anchor.

The algorithm continues with the potential anchors that have a greater distance from the input than the SM variance. The second check is to verify if the absolute distances between the potential anchor and the input are smaller than the distance between the input and the SM mean. This is justified by the fact that the greater proximity to the potential anchor indicates a disproportional influence of such a potential anchor. If so, this triggers the third step, with the relative relevance check, verifying if the distance between the input and potential anchor divided by the standard deviation of the time series (the square root of SMLTSV) is lower than the distance between the input and the SM mean divided by the standard deviation of the SM. This third step is required to obtain an importance proxy of the potential anchor to the input while considering the precision of the model in the calculation of its importance. In other words, if the model cannot properly capture the time series's structure, it should receive less importance than a more accurate model. The test must be replicated for every potential anchor. Since the anchoring bias is moderated by knowledge, as time goes on and the agent becomes aware of the biases associated with her decisions and acquires domain knowledge, the anchoring bias tends to be mitigated [ 30].

## 5 Proposal  Validation

To validate our proposed ontology, two case studies were conducted, and the methods employed consisted of the application of the anchoring detection mechanism in two real-world scenarios: 1) simulating the scenario of the COVID-19 toilet paper hoarding effect on Walmart [ 19] and 2) reproducing the experiment conducted by Haag et al. [ 17] that evaluated the effectiveness of an explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) information system (IS) as a mitigation mechanism for the anchoring bias.

## 5.1 Case Study: Hoarding &amp; Walmart's Bullwhip Effect

The value of the tool was assessed by how its implementation can prevent real-life problems, such as the toilet paper demand surge during the COVID-19 pandemic. Toilet paper is a product with one of the most stable demands in existence. However, the panic buying and hoarding during the COVID pandemic led to an increase of 845% in demand [ 19]. The variation of the order quantity over time can be interpreted as the definition of the bullwhip effect [ 22]. In fact, suboptimal decision-making contributes to the generation of the bullwhip effect [ 32].

Therefore, despite not having access to the precise data values, the impact can be understood through the percentage movements that were disclosed, knowing the demand suffered a major crash after the hoarding period. A hypothetical scenario reflecting the behaviour of the real phenomena was constructed to analyze the effect of hoarding on order quantity time series, assuming an average of 500.

The selected potential anchor was the Naive anchor, which means that the decision maker replicates the demand of the previous instance. This seems likely, given the performance of the supply chain [ 26]. Considering the expected stability of the demand, a potentially good forecasting algorithm is Holt, achieved simply by removing the outlier of the demand surge and forecasting two steps ahead [ 3].

The time series and SM variance can be extracted from the simulated data before the outlier. After the demand surge, there is a noticeable falloff, and the increase in variance for the supplier is directly related to the proximity to the real demand at the falloff point, which later on stabilized over time.

Therefore, the ADT is conducted in the following way: TSV = 27, SMV = 23, SMM = 515 (e.g. Holt model prediction two steps ahead), Potential Anchor = 4,459, and anchor type = Naive. After conducting the anchor detection test, the naive anchor is thus identified. The effectiveness of the system in preventing the bullwhip effect is made explicit when comparing the variances of the order time series TSV with intervention = 2,572 and TSV without the intervention = 1,309,503. Therefore, there is a reduction of 508 times. Note that despite following the system, there is still a major increase in variance; this is due to the atypical nature of the period analyzed. The numerical experiment and pseudo-code 1 showed the detection mechanism's effectiveness in addressing the anchoring bias. Thus, if the decision maker follows the feedback of our system, a crisis of this type may be prevented.

## 5.2 Anchorlogy x XAI

The experiment conducted by Haag et al. [ 17] evaluates the relevance of price anchors and unrelated anchors in the price estimation of vehicles. They implement an AI system that warns the decision-maker if the suggested price (when available) is classified as fair, moderate, or unfair. The classifications were given by a difference of 5%, 10%, and over 20% concerning market price. The XAI component uses Shapley-based explanations for the machine learning (ML) algorithm that calculates this price classification, hence informing the decision-maker of the expected value of each relevant characteristic of the vehicle.

The experiment is conducted with 390 participants and takes the control group (i.e., the mean of the price estimations without the anchors and their variance) as a rational reference.

The authors conclude that the integration between the Shapley values regarding the vehicle characteristics and the ML price classification is effective in detecting and mitigating the anchoring bias in unfair scenarios but not in moderate and fair ones. When applying our proposal in the same scenarios specified in their work, we obtain better results. Their results are reproduced in Table 1, in which we added the last column with the results from our proposal.

Table 1. Comparing the performance of our anchoring bias detection (Anchorlogy) with the results from [ 17] (XAI IS)

|   Task |   Listing price |   Fair price | Price fairnessXAI   | IS           | Anchorlogy   |
|--------|-----------------|--------------|---------------------|--------------|--------------|
|      1 |            7500 |         5193 | unfair              | Detected     | Detected     |
|      2 |            5990 |         5220 | moderate            | Not detected | Detected     |
|      3 |            8480 |         8256 | fair                | Not detected | Detected     |
|      4 |           22690 |        16652 | unfair              | Detected     | Detected     |
|      5 |           28900 |        25502 | moderate            | Not detected | Detected     |
|      6 |           24999 |        22981 | fair                | Not detected | Detected     |

As Table 1 shows, the Anchorlogy metrological approach is effective in the detection of the anchoring bias for all categories because of the relative importance assessment that considers the directional component and differences in variance between groups (rational reference and biased).

Since the paper [ 17] described the standard deviation of the control group, the experiments described in Table 1 can be simulated using our methodology, like the following example: The 'Price fairness' column indicated threshold of the distance from the input of the second group to the fair price. Take task 5, for instance; the fair price is 25,502, and its label is moderate, meaning that the input was between 5% and 10% above the fair price. The listing price is the anchor in question, and the variance of the control group and main group are displayed. Therefore, if we equate the control group to the statistical model, since it is the rational reference used by the authors, we have: SMM = Fair price = 25,502; PA = Listing price = 28,900; I = 25,502*107.5% = 27,415; SMV = Control group variance = 6,984; and SMLTSV = Experiment group variance = 10,925. When the ADT is conducted the anchor is detected, something that was not possible via the AI warning system.

Note that in the original experiment, the participants judgmentally estimated the price of a vehicle and had access to a listing price that played the role of anchor. The price estimation is unduly swayed by the listing price, even if the system informed the participants of the distortions in price fairness of moderate scale. Therefore, it is implied that the perceived relevance of the listing price is more relevant than the AI recommendation system. Thus, an algorithm aversion bias is automatically detected by our approach.

Furthermore, the anchoring effect manifested in the choice of maintaining the original decision is a consequence of the overconfidence of the participant's abilities to estimate the correct price of the asset. Thus, the detection of the anchoring bias automatically implies the detection of an overconfidence bias related to numerical estimation processes.

Due to our precise definitions of these subtypes of cognitive biases, our proposed approach is capable of automatically detecting not only anchoring but also overconfidence and algorithm aversion biases.

## 6 Conclusion

Considering the relevance that judgmental forecasting and adjustments play in decision-making, any distortion can bring disastrous consequences and even supply chain disruptions. Therefore, mitigating cognitive biases is paramount. Yet, its detection and measurement still pose challenges in the literature.

Anchoring is the most prevalent cognitive bias within the judgmental forecasting literature. In this work, we propose an ontology to precisely define the subtle notions that give rise to the Anchoring Effect and apply the ontology to help detect and mitigate the anchoring bias. The proposed mechanism uses a new metrological approach constructed for forecasting, allowing for the contextdependent nature of the anchoring bias to be dealt with. The system was effective when applied to prevent a real-world scenario during the COVID-19 pandemic and improved the detection of the Anchoring Bias when compared with an existing XAI IS solution.

Our proposal presents an opportunity to advance the humachine paradigm , defined by Sanders and Wood [ 29] as the perfect integration of computational mechanisms and humans in a system that can mitigate the deficiencies of both.

This integration is only possible because the belief formation process is made explicit by the ontology, thus, biased decisions, when detected by the proposed mechanism, indicate the belief distortion and the most likely anchor candidates for said bias. This proposal also makes explicit that all artificial agents, and by extension statistical models, have beliefs that the data they possess is correct and representative of the phenomena of interest, i.e. Time  Series  Beliefs .

Future work will address distinct types of cognitive biases while also integrating and testing it in real organizations, in a behavioral operations management case study. The explicit perspective of beliefs of artificial agents presents an interesting avenue of research to formulate an algorithmic bias ontology.

## References

1. Almeida, J., Falbo, R.A., Guizzardi, G.: Events as entities in ontology-driven conceptual modeling. In: Laender, A., Pernici, B., Lim, E.-P., de Oliveira, J. (eds.) ER 2019. LNCS, vol. 11788, pp. 469-483. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10. 1007/978-3-030-33223-5\_39
2. Arvan, M., Fahimnia, B., Reisi, M., Siemsen, E.: Integrating human judgement into quantitative forecasting methods: a review. Omega 86 , 237-252 (2019)
3. Bermúdez, J.D., Corberán-Vallet, A., Vercher, E.: Forecasting time series with missing data using Holt's model. J. Stat. Plann. Infer. 139 (8), 2791-2799 (2009)
4. Brauch, M., Mohaghegh, M., Gröler, A.: Causes of the bullwhip effect: a systematic review and categorization of its causes. Manag. Res. Rev. (2024)
5. Bunnin, N., Yu, J.: The Blackwell Dictionary of Western Philosophy. Wiley (2008)
6. Chapman, G.B., Johnson, E.J.: Anchoring, activation, and the construction of values. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 79 (2), 115-153 (1999)
7. Chudnoff, E.: What intuitions are like. Philos. Phenomenol. Res. 82 (3), 625-654 (2011)
8. Dennett, D.C.: The Intentional Stance. MIT press (1989)
9. Dietvorst, B.J., Simmons, J.P., Massey, C.: Algorithm aversion: people erroneously avoid algorithms after seeing them err. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 144 (1), 114-126 (2015)
10. Fonseca, C.M., Porello, D., Guizzardi, G., Almeida, J., Guarino, N.: Relations in ontology-driven conceptual modeling. In: Laender, A., Pernici, B., Lim, E.-P., de Oliveira, J. (eds.) ER 2019. LNCS, vol. 11788, pp. 28-42. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-33223-5\_4
11. Fonseca, C.M., et al.: Incorporating types of types in ontology-driven conceptual modeling. In: International Conference on Conceptual Modeling, pp. 18-34. Springer (2022)
12. Goodwin, P., Moritz, B., Siemsen, E.: Forecast decisions. In: Donohue, K., Katok, E., Leider, S. (eds.) The Handbook of Behavioral Operations, 1 edn, pp. 433-458. Wiley. (2018). https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119138341.ch12
13. Guizzardi, G., de Almeida Falbo, R., Guizzardi, R.S.: Grounding software domain ontologies in the unified foundational ontology (UFO): the case of the ode software process ontology. In: CIbSE, pp. 127-140. Citeseer (2008)

14. Guizzardi, R., Carneiro, B.G., Porello, D., Guizzardi, G.: A core ontology on decision making. In: ONTOBRAS (2020). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID: 226301332
15. Guizzardi, G., et al.: Types and taxonomic structures in conceptual modeling: a novel ontological theory and engineering support. Data Knowl. Eng. 134 , 101891 (2021)
16. Guizzardi, G., et al.: UFO: unified foundational ontology. Appl. Ontol. 17 (1), 167210 (2022)
17. Haag, F., Stingl, C., Zerfass, K., Hopf, K., Staake, T.: Overcoming anchoring bias: the potential of AI and XAI-based decision support. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04972 (2024)
18. Kahneman, D.: Thinking, fast and slow. Penguin Books, London (2012)
19. Kirk, C.P., Rifkin, L.S.: I'll trade you diamonds for toilet paper: consumer reacting, coping and adapting behaviors in the COVID-19 pandemic. J. Bus. Res. 117 , 124131 (2020)
20. Kolassa, S., Rostami-Tabar, B., Siemsen, E.: Demand Forecasting for Executives and Professionals, 1st edn. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL (2024)
21. Lieder, F., Griffiths, T.L., Huys, Q., Goodman, N.D.: The anchoring bias reflects rational use of cognitive resources. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 25 (1), 322-349 (2018). https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-017-1286-8
22. Monroe, R.W., Sanders, N.R.: Supply chain management: a global perspective. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ. Transp. J. 51 (4), 506-508 (2012). https://doi.org/10.5325/ transportationj.51.4.0506
23. Moritz, B., Siemsen, E., Kremer, M.: Judgmental forecasting: cognitive reflection and decision speed. Prod. Oper. Manag. 23 (7), 1146-1160 (2014)
24. Perera, H.N., Hurley, J., Fahimnia, B., Reisi, M.: The human factor in supply chain forecasting: a systematic review. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 274 (2), 574-600 (2019)
25. Porello, D., Guizzardi, G.: Towards an ontological modelling of preference relations. In: AI* IA 2018-Advances in Artificial Intelligence: XVIIth International Conference of the Italian Association for Artificial Intelligence, Trento, Italy, November 20-23, 2018, Proceedings 17, pp. 152-165. Springer (2018)
26. Rahman, T., Paul, S.K., Shukla, N., Agarwal, R., Taghikhah, F.: Managing panic buying-related instabilities in supply chains: a COVID-19 pandemic perspective. IFAC-PapersOnLine 55 (10), 305-310 (2022)
27. Ramos, E.d.C., Campos, M.L.M., Baião, F.: ABI approach: automatic bias identification in decision-making under risk based in an ontology of behavioral economics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14067 (2024)
28. Sales, T.P., Guarino, N., Guizzardi, G., Mylopoulos, J.: An ontological analysis of value propositions. In: 2017 IEEE 21st International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference (EDOC), pp. 184-193. IEEE, Quebec City, QC (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/EDOC.2017.32
29. Sanders, N.R., Wood, J.D.: The Humachine: Humankind, Machines, and the Future of Enterprise, 1 edn. Routledge (2019). https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429001178
30. Smith, A.R., Windschitl, P.D., Bruchmann, K.: Knowledge matters: anchoring effects are moderated by knowledge level. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 43 (1), 97-108 (2013)
31. Van Oudenhoven, B., Van De Calseyde, P., Basten, R., Demerouti, E.: Predictive maintenance for industry 5.0: behavioural inquiries from a work system perspective. Int. J. Prod. Res. 61 (22), 7846-7865 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543. 2022.2154403

32. Yang, Y., Lin, J., Liu, G., Zhou, L.: The behavioural causes of bullwhip effect in supply chains: a systematic literature review. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 236 , 108120 (2021)
33. Yasseri, T., Reher, J.: Fooled by facts: quantifying anchoring bias through a largescale experiment. J. Comput. Soc. Sci. 5 (1), 1001-1021 (2022)
34. Zanddizari, M., Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, R., Azaron, A.: Modeling stock-out loss and overstocking loss generated by bullwhip effect. Sci. Iranica 26 (3), 1913-1924 (2019). https://doi.org/10.24200/sci.2018.20199
35. Zellner, M., Abbas, A.E., Budescu, D.V., Galstyan, A.: A survey of human judgement and quantitative forecasting methods. Roy. Soc. Open Sci. 8 (2), 201187 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.201187
