## An Ontological Model for Urinary Profiles

Fabrício Henrique Rodrigues, José Antônio Teser Poloni, Cecília Dias Flores, Liane Nanci Rotta Postgraduate Program in Health Sciences Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre - UFCSPA Porto Alegre, Brazil

titofhr@gmail.com, jatpoloni@yahoo.com.br, {dflores, lnrotta}@ufcspa.edu.br

Abstract - Urinalysis   is   the   test   of   urine,   which,   identifying presence of particles and substances in the sample can provide valuable   information   about   patient's   urinary   and renal condition as well as about major metabolic functions. Even though being a quick, accurate and cost-effective test, it has not received   proper   attention,   preventing   it   to   achieve   its   whole power.   Capability   to   identify   the   main   urinary   particles   and arrange urinary findings in a clinical  context  are  among the requirements  to   change   this   scenario.   Since   these   are   chiefly informational   tasks,   they   seem   to   be   liable   to   computational representation. This way, this work presents an ontological model to represent urinary profiles in order to allow such arrange of findings   and   help   to   predict   contents   to   be   searched   in   the sample. It is based on an ontological analysis of the problem and formalized   according   to   the   Unified   Foundational   Ontology (UFO). The paper also brings an implementation of such model to deal with the case of nephritic profile. It is implemented using OWL 2 and allows   important   inference   through   simple   DL queries.   Besides   dealing   with   urinary   profiles,   the   proposed model   may   also   give   insight   on   how   to   deal   with   correlate domains (e.g. blood or liquor tests) and may be generalized to similar situations in different scopes (e.g. employee profiling).

Keywords- Ontology; Ontologies; Urinalysis; Urinary Profiles; Profiles;   Health   Informatics;   Unified   Foundational   Ontology; UFO; OWL

## I. INTRODUCTION

Urinalysis   is   probably   the   earliest   test   of   laboratory medicine [1]. It can be defined as the testing of urine with procedures commonly performed in an expeditious, reliable, accurate, safe, and cost-effective manner [2]. It is carried out basically   in   two   phases:   physicochemical   analysis   and microscopic analysis [1] [3].

Physicochemical   analysis   aims   to   identify   substances present   in   the   urine   specimen   (e.g.   hemoglobin,   glucose, ascorbic acid, leukocyte esterase) as well as its pH and specific gravity. It is carried out by means of urinary dipsticks - i.e. plastic   strips   with   reactive   areas   that   give   an   approximate estimation of the desired physical and chemical parameters of urine. Microscopic analysis is carried out over a spot of urine disposed on a microscope slide in order to identify urinary particles (e.g. cells, crystals, casts) in the sample. The same slide is analyzed tens of times, in different microscopic fields (i.e.   regions   of   the   slide).   Information   gathered   during physicochemical analysis and observation of previous fields guide the search on the following fields.

Urinalysis findings (i.e. substances and particles) provide valuable   information   about   patient's   urinary   and   renal condition as well as about major metabolic functions [1]. For this   reason,   nowadays,   urinalysis   is   an   integral   part   of   the patient examination. However, even though being important, inexpensive and dealing   with   an   easily   collected   body   fluid,   this   laboratory exam has not received the proper attention, being too focused on the physicochemical analysis, with microscopy performed without correct methods, equipment, and qualified professionals [4]. This way, reported results rely too much on approximated   values   of   physicochemical   parameters,   with significant particles being missed, misidentified or misinterpreted. It means missing valuable information about the patient [5] and calls into question the quality of the test. Some   requirements   were   established   to   change   this situation [5], including capability to identify the main urinary particles and arrange urinary findings in a clinical context. To deal with these two specific requirements, expert's resort to pieces of knowledge called urinary profiles - i.e. groups of particles and substances usually found in a same specimen, which   are   related   to   some   patient's   clinical   condition   [3]. Besides putting findings in context, the expedient of regarding urine contents as profile constituents allows predicting contents - i.e. if a sample contains elements that suggests a special profile, the remaining components pointed out by such profile are likely to be present in the sample too. Thereby, having an accurate   notion   of   what   may   be   encountered   in   a   sample reduces   the   chance   of   not   identifying   it   when   it   is   found, reducing the likelihood of missing or misinterpreting a particle during microscopy. Given this short description, urinalysis domain seems to be liable   to   have   its   knowledge   represented   by   computational the domain could be explained resorting to the concepts of ontologies (i.e. explicit specifications of conceptualizations [6]) concepts is already represented in other biomedical ontologies

means. Moreover, bearing in mind its importance and current need   for   quality   improvement   and   professional   training,   it seems to deserve such an effort. Considering that great part of urine and its possible contents, the tools used during the test and all the relationships among such concepts, it seems that are a good choice for the task. In fact, although there is no specific   ontology   for   urinalysis,   a   substantial   part   of   its [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12]. They model urinalysis as a procedure, with concepts for its procedural steps (both in physicochemical analysis [8] and microscopy [7]) as well as concepts for all types of urinary contents (e.g. cells, chemical substances [7]

[9], including notions of abnormal values [12]) and tools for the   test   [10].   Nevertheless,   the   definitions   of   concepts   are rather shallow, with few relationships among them, and some weird definitions from ontological standpoint (e.g. in [9], the concept   of   analyte   -   i.e.   the   object   that   is   target   of   an observation procedure - is defined as subtype of urinalysis, which is an observation procedure itself). Besides that, even though biomedical ontologies have descriptions for a variety of renal and urinary-tract conditions [7], there is no link between such concepts and related urinary findings. Finally, considering that none of the analyzed ontologies has any model for urinary profiles, they provide no way to arrange urinary findings in a clinical   context   -   one   of   the   key   requirements   to   improve urinalysis quality. This lack of representation turns out to be a good research opportunity that is explored in this paper.

Thus, this work presents an ontological model for urinary profiles (and the concepts related o it), based on the Unified Foundational Ontology   (UFO)   [13], along with   an implementation using the Web Ontology Language - Second Version (OWL 2) [14]. It is conceived  to allow answering questions   such   as   (i)   which   urinary   profiles   a   given   urine presents, (ii) which of its contents allowed the identification of each   profile   and   (iii)   given   these   urinary   profiles,   which contents one should expect to find in that urine. With such capabilities, the proposed model and the corresponding OWL 2 implementation are intended to be useful for the development of decision-support and tutoring systems for urinalysis (e.g. allowing predicting contents that may be found in urine and explaining such predictions in terms of urinary profiles), as well as to be directly queried for reference.

The remaining   sections   of   this   article   are   organized   as follows: section 2 discusses the ontological nature of urinary profiles and constructs the derived ontological model, section 3 presents an OWL 2 implementation of this model, along with description logic queries (DL queries) to get information from it, and section 4 brings our concluding remarks and points out some opportunities for future work.

## II. URINARY PROFILE ONTOLOGICAL REPRESENTATION

Prior   to   the   discussion   about   the   ontological   nature   of urinary profiles and related concepts, we need to define three basic concepts: Urine , Urinary Analyte and Urinary Content . Urine is defined as a body fluid, produced inside kidneys, that is   normally   95%   water   and   5%   solutes   -   mainly   urea, creatinine,   uric   acid,   chloride,   sodium   and   potassium,   in roughly   defined   proportion   [1].   Given   that   definition,   this concept can be classified as a UFO's Quantity universal 1 (i.e. a rigid universal that supplies its instances with a principle of identity but not an individuation principle). Urinary Analyte is the category of things of interest in urinalysis. Although the term 'analyte' is usually employed to refer only to chemical substances, here it also refers to microscopic particles that may appear on urine (e.g. cells, bacteria). We assume that what is of interest in urinalysis would be so in any possible world. Thus, we classify this concept as a UFO's Category universal (i.e. a dispersive,   rigid   and   relationally   independent   universal   that aggregate properties that are common to different sortals), that includes virtually anything independent from urine (therefore excluding its main component substances) that might appear in it. Urinary Content is any Urinary Analyte present in urine. This concept can be classified as a UFO's RoleMixin universal (i.e. a dispersive, anti-rigid universal that aggregates properties which are common to different roles, that does not carry any identity   principle   and   whose   instances   are   relationally dependent on other particulars), being a role played in relation to some Urine by a variety of types of particles and chemical substances.

1 Except for  explicitly   stating   otherwise,   the   definitions   of   UFO concepts hereafter mentioned are based on [13]

Now,   what   turns   out   to   be   a   urinary   profile?   Urinary profiles   can   be   seen   as   combinations   of   findings   that recurrently appear together in urine samples and are recognized as a unit with its own meaning. In fact, urinalysis experts regard urinary profiles as a means of forecasting contents in a urine sample [Interviews with professional experts]. This way, every   urinary   profile   has   at   least   one   subset   of   hallmark findings [3] that allows its identification. If one of these set of contents   is   found   in   a   urine   sample,   the   sample   can   be considered as presenting the corresponding profile and so it is reasonable to expect that the remaining constituents prescribed by the profile will be found as well - although there is no guarantee.   In   other   words,   urinary   profiles   are   a   set   of expectations put on a urine sample.

Analyzing this description,  it   is   possible   to   say   that   an instance  of   Urine   is   recognized   as   presenting   some   urinary profile   given   the   presence   of   instances   of   specific   Urinary Contents. Moreover, when an instance of Urine recognized as presenting a profile, it is regarded as being in a special class (i.e. that of the urines that present a urinary profile). To account for this class, we propose the concept of Profiled Urine .

The same way that being a Urinary Content is a role played by an entity in relation to a Urine that contains such entity, being a Profiled Urine is a role played by some urine in relation to a set of specific urinary contents present in it. Thereby, Profiled Urine is a UFO's Role universal (i.e. an anti-rigid universal that carries an identity principle - in this case, that of Urine - and whose instances are relationally dependent on other particulars).

Following this line of reasoning, it is also possible to say that the instances of Urinary Content that allow the recognition of a Profiled Urine are also regarded in a special way. To deal with  it   we   came   up   with   the   concept   of Profile-Defining Content . It is a specialization of the Urinary Content universal and may depend on the existence of other Urinary Contents that, in conjunction with it, make up a set of Urinary Contents that allows some Urine to be recognized as a profiled one. Finally,   as   different   types   of   particles   and   substances   may assume this role, it cannot carry any identity principle - and so it is also classified as a UFO's RoleMixin universal.

Now, let us elaborate on the nature of the Urinary Profile concept. Every instance of Profiled Urine is characterized by an instance   of   Urinary   Profile.  A  Urinary   Profile   is   a   set   of expectations that emerge from a Profiled Urine. A universal to account for the notion of expectation 2 would be classified as a UFO's   Mode   universal   (i.e.   intrinsic   moment 3 that   is   not directly related to quality structures and can be conceptualized in terms of multiple separable quality dimensions) - and so could be classified Urinary Profile. However, the instances of an Expectation universal   would   inhere   in   the   subject   that expects. In our case, this subject would be the professional analyzing a Profiled Urine - who would expect to find the Urinary   Contents   prescribed   by   the   corresponding   Urinary Profile.

2 A  belief   that   something   will   happen   or   is   likely   to   happen (http://www.merriam-webster.com/)

3 An abstract property [15]

Nevertheless,   our   modeling   intention   excludes   the representation   of   any   observer   and   focuses   on   having   a description of the objects under analysis during urinalysis (i.e. urine   and   its   contents).   Furthermore,   once   the   professional recognizes some Urine as presenting a Urinary Profile, such profile becomes a feature of that urine (as well as each of the expectations that make it up), causing it to be treated as a different class of thing. Therefore, when referring to Urinary Profile as a set of expectations, we must not be referring to those   things   inhering   in   the   observer   professional,   but   to particulars inhering in the instance of Urine under analysis (i.e. the expectations 'put on' the urine, so to speak). Except for some spectacular   surprise   nature   may   reserve   to   us,   Urine instances are not able to expect anything. Then, what inheres in a   Profiled   Urine   is   not   an   expectation   (in   the   sense   here adopted), but something else.

A Urine characterized by a Urinary Profile makes the one analyzing it expects to find certain contents. So, when a Urine starts to play the role of Profiled Urine, it receives the property of   causing   specific   expectations   in   its   observers.   Thus,   an instance of Urinary Profile is a set of particulars that leads a trained observer to expect certain contents in the urine. We will call   such   particulars   as   'expectation-makers'.   Acting   as dispositions - like that of a magnetic material to attract metallic objects [13] - the notion of 'expectation-maker' would also be a UFO's Mode universal, as well as Urinary Profile.

Since a Urine starts to be characterized by a Urinary Profile when considered as Profiled Urine, and Profiled Urine is a role in relation to Profile-Defining Contents, Urinary Profile is an externally dependent mode (i.e. an individual mode that inhere in a single individual but that existentially depends on other individuals that are independent of its bearer [15]). In this case, Urinary Profile instances are dependent on the Profile-Defining Contents that allow the recognition of a Profiled Urine - and that justify the expectations raised by the profile. In a similar way,   there   certainly   are   some   moments   inhering   in   each Profile-Defining Content that are externally dependent on the Profiled Urine - although we will not further investigate them.

Both   Urinary   Profiles   and   the   externally-dependent moments inhering in the instances of Profile-Defining Content have a common foundation: the fact that a special combination of contents is present in the urine.  In other words, the merely existence of a urine and some specific particles and substances does not make it a Profiled Urine, nor makes the particles and substances become Profile-Defining Contents - it is necessary that   the   Urine   instance   contains   that   exact   combination   of particles and substances.

Given   the   need   of   such   foundation   to   suitably   define Profiled Urine, Profile-Defining Content and their externallydependent moments, we can think of this situation as a case of material relation (i.e. a relation that has material structure of its own, needing the existence of another entity to mediate its relata). So, to cope with it, we resort to a Profile-Defining Presence universal to act as a UFO's Relator (i.e. relational moment,  which   depends   on   a   plurality   of   individuals   and mediates them allowing the existence of a material relation).

Profile-Defining Presence universal represents the conditions in which instances of Urine and Urine Contents must connect to one another (including content combination and quantities) in order to receive the roles of Profiled Urine and   Profile-Defining   Content   -   and,   consequently,   the corresponding   externally-dependent   moments.   It   is   also   the variety   of   different   types   of   Profile-Defining   Presence (defining   different   combinations   of   Urinary   Contents   that justify   the   expectations   raised   by   a   Urinary   Profile)   that provides   the   different   criteria   according   to   which   a   Urine instance may be considered as presenting a Urinary Profile.

Finally, instances of such relator universal help to answer important questions such as 'Why does content C 1 define the sample as having profile P but content C 2 does not?' or 'Why content C is a Profile-Defining Content in sample S 1 but not in sample S 2 ?'.

Figure 1. Ontological Model for Urinary Profile

[FIGURE]

Figure 1 depicts the ontological model for Urinary Profile, relating the concepts defined in this section. Urine instances may or may not contain Urinary Contents, but every instance of Urinary Content is contained in exactly one instance of Urine. In   turn,   Profiled   Urine   instances   must   contain   at   least   one instance   of   Profile-Defining   Content   -   that   will   define   it (possibly in conjunction with other contents) as presenting a profile - and each instance of Profile-Define Content defines a single instance of Profiled Urine (i.e. that it is contained in). Each Profiled Urine, due to playing such a role, is characterized by at least one Urinary Profile, that indicates two or more expected contents - all of them instances of Urinary Analyte.

An instance of Profiled Urine may host different ProfileDefining Presences, each mediating a different combination of Profile-Defining Contents that corresponds to different specific Urinary Profiles - and thus, a single Profiled Urine may play different   roles,   corresponding   to   different   Urinary   Profiles. Likewise, although each instance of Profile-Defining Content defines   only   one   Profiled   Urine,   it   may   also   take   part   in different Profile Defining Presences, sharing more than one instance   of   the   'defines'   relationship   with   the   Urine   it   is contained in - and thus assigning different roles to it.

Figure 2. Ontological Model for Nephritic Profile

[FIGURE]

An example of use of the model brought in figure 1 is presented   in   figure   2.   It   is   applied   to   model   the   case   of Nephritic Profile (i.e. a urinary profile generally presented by urine specimens of patients suffering from nephritic syndrome). Nephritic   Profile   is   a   Urinary   Profile   that   makes   the professional analyzing the Profiled Urine it characterizes (i.e. a Nephritic Urine) expect to find at least one RBC Cast (i.e. protein structure formed inside kidneys with some red blood cells attached to it), at least a Dismorphic RBC (i.e. red blood cell with unusual shape) and some quantity of hemoglobin (i.e. pigment of red blood cells) and of albumin (i.e. a protein). 4

Urine can also be regarded as a nephritic one. Likewise, being part of this presence makes the instances of Hemoglobin and Albumin   become   Nephritic-Defining   Contents   (NephriticDefining   Hemoglobin   and   Nephritic-Defining   Albumin, respectively). Something that is important to emphasize is the fact that both substances are needed to constitute the referred presence (and so grant nephritic-related roles to them and the containing urine). If only one of the substances is present, the Nephritic-Defining Presence is not formed and the substance does   not   define   the   Urine   as   nephritic   -   nor   becomes   a Nephritic-Defining Content.

Being a Profiled Urine, an instance of Nephritic Urine must host   a   Profile-Defining   Presence.   However,   to   be   regarded specifically as a Nephritic Urine it hosts a Nephritic-Defining Presence   (a   specialization   of   the   general   Profile-Defining Presence), which mediates Nephritic-Defining Contents. There are some different combinations of contents that make up a Nephritic-Defining Presence - two of them are shown here. For each of them, we further specializes the concept of NephriticDefining Content.

The first specialization is the Nephritic-Defining Presence of RBC Cast, which accounts for the case of an instance of Urine   containing   at   least   an   instance   of   RBC   Cast.   Thus, having a Urine containing a RBC Cast, we have this type of Nephritic-Defining Presence, which allows us to say that such RBC Cast defines the Urine that contains it as a Nephritic Urine.   Consequently,   this   RBC   Cast   becomes   a   NephriticDefining RBC Cast - a specialization of Nephritic-Defining Content for this particular type of presence.

Analogously, there is the Nephritic-Defining Presence of Substances, which deals with an instance of Hemoglobin and other of Albumin contained in Urine 5 . Hosting such presence, a It is also noteworthy that, even though an instance of the general role of Nephritic-Defining Content may be content of many different Nephritic-Defining Presences, the instances of Nephritic-Defining RBC Cast can be content of solely one Nephritic-Defining Presence of RBC-Cast, since all RBC Casts in the Urine would be considered part of the same presence. The same holds for  Albumin   and   Hemoglobin   for   similar reasons. Finally, albeit a Profiled Urine may be characterized by many Urinary Profiles, it is characterized by at most one instance   of   each   type   of   Urinary   Profile.   For   example, Nephritic   Urine   is   characterized   by   exactly   one   Nephritic Profile instance. It may also be characterized by other types of Urinary   Profiles   (e.g.   Hepatic   Profile,   Bacterial   Infection Profile) if its contents define it in such ways. Nevertheless, once   some   combination   of   contents   defined   the   Urine   as Nephritic, it started to present the Nephritic Profile and the expectations are raised, another Nephritic-Defining Presence will not create a new Nephritic Profile - but just reinforce the one already existing.

4 The actual Nephritic Profile has some other expected contents not presented here for brevity.

5 Again, there are specific amounts of Hemoglobin and Albumin that characterizes this presence - that were also omitted here for brevity.

## III. AN EXAMPLE IMPLEMENTATION IN OWL 2

We have so far been dealing with the ontological nature of urinary   profiles   and   the   concepts   related   to   them   -   what culminated   in   the   presented   ontological   model.   Having understood such ideas,   we  are   now   able   to   implement   the conceived   model   in   any   representational   language   of   our choice. Nevertheless, we should always bear in mind that every language has its expressiveness limitations so that, no matter which one we use, we will probably have to make adjustments to   the   model   in   order   to   reach   compromise   solutions   that preserve some aspects over others.

Considering   that,   we   will   present   an   example   of implementation of the proposed model using OWL 2. We chose it   since   it   is   one   of   the   most   popular   ontology   languages, widely used in diverse areas, even being adopted as a de facto standard in the life sciences community, as well as achieving the   status   of   W3C   recommendation   [14].   In   a   nutshell, ontologies are represented in OWL 2 by means of classes (i.e. sets of individuals comprised by a concept of human thinking), individuals (i.e. references to particulars in the world, generally instances of some class), properties (i.e. binary relationships either between an individual and a datatype value - called data properties   -   or   between   two   individuals   -   called   object properties or, in a less formal way, relationships) and property restrictions (i.e. used along with properties to define classes for example, the class Car could be described as the class of individuals related through the property hasPart to at least 4 individuals of the class Wheels ). For further definitions, one should   refer   to   [16].   All   OWL   snippets   in   this   paper   are presented using the OWL Manchester Syntax [17].

Our example will cover  the representation  of   the   main model structure along with the case of nephritic profile. It was devised in view of supporting decision during urinalysis as well as acting as a tool for professional training. Therefore, it was intended to be used by a person analyzing a urine specimen (hereafter referred to as 'user') by providing an instance of urine with instances of all analytes that were observed in it and getting   answers   for   the   three   questions   elaborated   in introduction (i.e. determining which profiles the urine presents, which contents allowed their identification and which contents are expected to be found). The example is entirely represented using OWL 2 and requires the use of a semantic reasoner (e.g. HermiT 6 ) in order to make the necessary inferences to provide the desired answers.

Figure   3   presents   both   the   class   and   object   property hierarchies employed in the example, that cover main concepts and relationships brought by the proposed model. To represent a urine specimen and its contents, the user only needs to create an   instance   of Urine ,   instances   for   each   of   the Urinary Analytes observed in it and an instance of Urinary Presence to relate them. Then, it is just needed to link the instance of Urine to that of Urinary Presence through the property hosts and link each   instance   representing   the   contents   to   that   of Urinary Presence via   the   property contentOf .   We   also   defined   the property chain

```
ObjectProperty: contains SubPropertyChain: hosts o inverse(contentOf)
```

so that the property contains is inferred to link the instance of urine and those of each of its contents.

Even though most of the concepts on the ontological model have   explicit   constraints   to   define   their   meanings,   we represented only those related to the classes that are important to   achieve   the   objectives   of   the   example   (i.e.   answer   the proposed questions), leaving the remaining ones as primitive classes (i.e. having no necessary and sufficient classification criteria,   so   that   an   instance   cannot   be   inferred   to   be   direct member of such class).

6 http://hermit-reasoner.com/

Figure 3. Class Hierarchy for Nephritic Profile Example

[FIGURE]

The nephritic-defining presences of interest were defined as follows

```
Class: Nephritic­Defining_Presence_of_RBC_Cast EquivalentTo: inverse(hosts) some Urine and inverse(contentOf) some RBC_Cast Class: Nephritic­Defining_Presence_of_Substances EquivalentTo: inverse(hosts) some Urine and inverse(contentOf) some Albumin and inverse(contentOf) some Hemoglobin
```

Therefore, if a Urinary Presence instance has an instance of Urine linked to it via hosts property and instances of Albumin and Hemoglobin linked to it via contentOf property, it will be inferred to be a Nephritic-Defining Presence of Substances -assuming such role just as prescribed by the ontological model. An analogous process would take place if the content was a RBC Cast .

Having   a Nephritic-Defining   Presence ,   it   would   be expected that its contents were classified as Nephritic-Defining Contents . Thereby, the class representing this last concept was defined as follows

```
Class: Nephritic­Defining_Content EquivalentTo: RBC_Cast and contentOf some Nephritic­Defining_Presence_of_RBC_Cast or Albumin and contentOf some Nephritic­Defining_Presence_of_Substances or Hemoglobin and contentOf some Nephritic­Defining_Presence_of_Substances
```

Since there will be a single instance of Urinary Presence mediating all   the   contents   of   urine,   it   was   not   possible   to simply say that all contents mediated by a Nephritic-Defining Presence are Nephritic-Defining Contents - otherwise, once a presence   was   classified   as   a   defining   one,   every   content mediated by such presence would be classified as defining content, no matter how unrelated to the Nephritic Profile they may be. Thus, it was necessary to enumerate all combinations of   content   and   presence   that   grant   the Nephritic-Defining Content role to the content (e.g. RBC Casts are only classified as such if mediated by a Nephritic-Defining Presence of RBC Cast ).

On the other hand, since each instance of Urinary Presence mediates just one instance of Urine ,   to   classify   such Urine instance as Nephritic Urine due to be hosting a NephriticDefining Presence it was only needed to define

```
Class: Nephritic_Urine EquivalentTo: Urine and hosts some Nephritic­Defining_Presence
```

Now, turning to the representation of Urinary Profile . The main purpose of employing urinary profiles is being able to know what to expect to find in urine given what is already found - in other words, to predict the remaining contents of the urine. So, its expected contents should be represented in a way that   they   could   be  easily   retrieved,   in   order   to   enable   such prediction. Nevertheless, how could we refer to instances of things that we still do not know - and that perhaps do not exist at all? It is true that in OWL 2 we could say that a Nephritic Profile has some unspecific instance (or instances) of a class as its expected content in the following way

```
Class: Nephritic Profile SubClassOf: hasExpectedContent some RBC
```

Yet, due to the limitations every language presents (as we discussed before), it  seems  to be really hard to get the terms that make up an anonymous subclass expression (e.g. the RBC part of hasExpectedContent some RBC ),   since   in   OWL the relationships  are   established   solely   in   instance   level,   not   in class level - so that Nephritic\_Profile hasExpectedContent some   RBC does   not   states   any   relationship   between Nephritic\_Profile and RBC , but just a feature their instances may present. On the other hand, dealing with instances the task becomes very much easier. So, we created ideal instances for every expected content of Nephritic Profile and defined this class as

```
Class: Nephritic Profile SubClassOf: hasExpectedContent value proto_RBC_Cast hasExpectedContent value proto_Dismorphic_RBC hasExpectedContent value proto_Albumin hasExpectedContent value proto_Hemoglobin
```

Although it is not a correct  solution from a conceptual standpoint   (e.g.   instances   of Nephritic Profile makes   one expect to find any possible Dismorphic RBC , in any amount, and   not   a   single   specific   instance   of   it),   representing   the expectations by means of referring to a prototypical instance (i.e. an example instance) of the expected content has practical value.   Despite   the   fact   that   there   is   no   semantic   for   such prototypical types in OWL 2, it may acquire meaning by use, so that presenting it to the user gives an idea of what to expect in urine - especially considering that, with such prototypical instance, s/he may verify the class it is instance of and so focus her/his attention to contents of such type.

Proceeding with profiles, in order to allow the identification of which contents are expected due to which profiles (already considering   a   broader   scenario,   where   the   model   is   not restricted   to   the   nephritic   case   covered   here),   we   created   a default instance of Nephritic Profile (as it should be done with every profile type added to the model), so that if and urine is classified   as Nephritic   Urine it   will   be   inferred   to   be characterizedBy this   default   instance.   So,   the   definition   of Nephritic Urine is completed by the statement

```
SubClassOf: caracterizedBy value def_Nephritic_Profile
```

being def\_Nephritic\_Profile the mentioned default instance of Nephritic Profile.

Differently   from   the   case   of   prototypical   instances   of expected   contents,   this   solution   is   not   conceptually   wrong. Considering that the intended use for the model is analyzing one instance of Urine at a time, it is simply a single Nephritic Profile characterizing   a   single Urine ,   as   defined   in   the ontological model. The definition of such instance prior to the existence of the instances of Urine and its contents is just a workaround to the fact that it cannot be automatically created when the urine is inferred to be nephritic. Moreover as OWL (and the description logics that grounds it) is monotonic, it makes no difference when instances are created: once they are defined, it is as they had always coexisted.

Finally, to make it easier to retrieve all expected contents for an instance of Urine ,   we defined the following property chain

```
ObjectProperty: hasExpectedContent SubPropertyChain: characterizedBy o hasExpectedContent
```

so that if a Urine is characterizedBy a Urinary Profile and this profile hasExpectedContent some analyte, it is inferred that the Urine instance itself hasExpectedContent that analyte.

Now, let us head to the way we can get the answers to the questions we posed on the beginning of the section. Imagine that   the   user   has   created   the   following   instances:   my\_ urine ( Urine ),   my\_ presence ( Urinary   Presence ), my\_hemoglobin ( Hemoglobin ), my\_albumin ( Albumin ), my\_rbc\_cast ( RBC\_Cast )   and my\_bilirrubin ( Bilirrubin ).   Completing   the scenario, imagine that the user has established the following relationships:

my\_urine hosts my\_presence

```
my_hemoglobin contentOf my_presence my_albumin contentOf my_presence my_rbc_cast contentOf my_presence my_bilirrubin contentOf my_presence
```

Given   that, my\_urine would  be   classified   as Nephritic Urine ,   both   due   to   the   presence   of my\_albumin and my \_h emoglobin and that of my\_rbc\_cast - and these instances would be inferred to be Nephritic-Defining Contents . Being a Nephritic Urine ,   it   would   be   inferred   to   be characterizedBy def\_Nephritic\_Profile . In addition, my\_urine would be inferred to hasExpectedContent proto\_RBC\_Cast , proto\_Dismorphic\_RBC , proto\_Albumin and proto\_Hemoglobin .

With this, one could use the DL queries bellow to answer questions   about   (i)   which   instances   of   urinary   profiles characterize my\_urine ,   (ii)   which   contents   allowed   the recognition of such profiles (knowing by the previous question that   the   only   identified   profile   was   the   nephritic   one),   (iii) which predictions can be made given such urine and (iv) which predictions   can   be   made   given   each   of   the   profiles   that characterize the urine - again, considering the answer of (i).

- (i) inverse(characterizedBy) value my\_urine
- (ii) inverse(contains) value my\_urine and Nephritic­Defining\_Content
- (iii) inverse(hasExpectedContent) value my\_urine
- (iv) inverse(hasExpectedContent) value def\_Nephritic\_Profile

These are simple queries that provide valuable information about the model - what contributes to demonstrate the power of   the   ontological   model   proposed   and   its   corresponding implementation strategy in OWL 2. It is important to note that, even if there were more urinary profiles available and the same urine was characterized by more than one profile, this structure would  recognize   the   defining   contents   separately   for   each profile. The same would be achieved for the expected contents by examining each of the inferred profiles.

It is still not possible (in such a simple way as by means of DL queries) to discriminate the different groups that could, alone,   define   the   urine   as   nephritic   (i.e. my\_albumin and my\_hemoglobin in one group, my\_rbc\_cast in another). One may think about specializations of Nephritic-Defining Content class or definition of SWRL rules [18], but here, for simplicity, we preferred to leave the example free from such approaches remaining as much as possible a faithful picture of the original ontological model. However, it is important to keep in mind that this issue is a matter of expressiveness limitations of OWL and not something intrinsic to the proposed ontological model - so that one could get rid of it by implementing the ontological model in a more expressive language.

Finally, answers for other questions (including those about what classes the instances received as answers are instance of), could be get by inspecting the ontology classification results, by   stating   queries   in   SPARQL   [19]   and   related   query languages, or by external algorithmic means, using tools such as the OWL API [20].

## IV. FINAL REMARKS

This   work   presented   an   ontological   model   for   urinary profiles in the context of urinalysis. It defines a urinary profile as an abstract feature presented by certain specimens of urine that leads the professionals analyzing them to expect that some specific   types   of   content   will   be   found   during   the   their examination.   Moreover,   it   explains   the   emergence   of   such profiles as a result of a dynamics involving urine and certain combinations of contents playing specific roles in relation to each other. Finally, we brought an example of implementation of the proposed ontological model using OWL 2.

At a first glance, it could be weird to consider a Urinary Profile as   a   set   of   'expectation-makers'  and that this could characterizes Urine . Yet, in light of some other concepts we are used to, this approach would become much more acceptable. As mentioned in [15], a particular such as John qua-husband bears a variety of external dependent moment, exemplified by the legal responsibilities acquired by virtue of being married. It is   not   completely   amiss   to   regard   responsibilities   as   social expectations   that   individuals   will   do   something.   Such analogous cases strengthens our claims about the nature of Urinary Profile concept.

Beyond that, the proposed model seems to be useful to deal with the uncertain aspect of expectations, disentangling the notion   of   expectation/possibility   that   the   urine   contains something from the idea of actual containment. Besides, it founds   such   expectations   on   the   presence   of   special combinations of urinary contents, bringing to light an important concept ( Profile-Defining Presence ), which may be overlooked at first, but that reveals itself as a central piece of the puzzle. In addition, the core model is fairly small, with only 7 concepts 5 of which need to be specialized to represent the variety of different urinary profiles. Withal, its implementation in OWL 2 was reasonably straightforward (excluding the adjustments due to language limitations), simple in structure and yet sufficiently powerful to provide answers for the main questions profiles are intended to address. It is a sign that the concept definitions brought by the proposed model are not far-fetched concerns, but reveals a coherent and valuable ontological view of reality.

This   work   is   part   of   a   greater   effort   to   develop   a knowledge-based system for urinalysis, aiming to be used as a decision   support   system   and   as   a   means   of   professional training. The presented ontological model integrates a broader ontology for urinalysis domain and is being used to model the different possible types of urinary profiles and so explain and reproduce   the   predictions   urinalysis   experts   make   during examination   of   the   specimen   (i.e.   user   analyzes   a   urine specimen and informs to the system each new finding s/he observes; after each new finding, the system updates the urine specimen representation - i.e. an instance of Urine -  in the OWL model; then the system uses a semantic reasoner to reclassify the ontology and applies the DL queries presented to discover which profiles the urine presents and so inform it the user,   along   with   content   predictions   and   profile-based explanations).

Future work will focus on investigating how information about things external to the urine (e.g. the type of patient it was collected from) can influence the expectations over a urine specimen   (thus   affecting   existing   urinary   profiles   or   even defining new ones) in order to include such aspect on the proposed ontological model. This work may also give insight on how to model similar problems that are likely to arise in related areas - such as the analysis of other body fluids (e.g. blood, cerebrospinal fluid) - since it is probable that certain clinical conditions may cause the appearance of certain types of contents in their respective specimens.

Finally, dealing with profiles in order to learn what could be expected from a situation based on what is already known seems to be a familiar  reasoning pattern. For instance, it is reasonable to think that a person who presents a given set of abilities (e.g. programming skills) may be expected to present some other characteristics too (e.g. good logic reasoning) and a company may take advantage of it while allocating its employees   on   projects.   Likewise,   a   customer   who   usually accesses a webstore via a given channel (e.g. smartphone) and usually buys certain category of products (e.g. cookbooks) may raise the expectation that s/he would be interested in some other class of services/products (e.g. cooking podcasts, rss feed with receipts). Thus, this work may also provide an interesting perspective   over   this   type   of   problem   (e.g.   separating   the notions of expectation and actual existence) - and future efforts will   be   carried   out   to   generalize   the   proposed   model   in   a pattern to be applied in a broader range of situations.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Thanks to Joel Luis Carbonera for the helpful insights and valuable  discussions. This work  was  partially supported  by CAPES (project Pró-Ensino na Saúde - n 39 ).

## REFERENCES

- [1] Strasinger, S. K, Di Lorenzo, M. S. 2008. Urinalysis and Body Fluids (5ed). F. A. Davis Company. Philadelphia, USA.
- [2] Clinical   and   Laboratory   Standards   Institute   (CLSI).   2001.  Approved Guideline   GP16-A2:   Urinalysis   and   Collection,   Transportation,   and Preservation of Urine Specimens (2ed). CLSI. Wayne, USA.
- [3] Fogazzi, G. B. 2010. The Urinary Sediment: An Integrated View (3ed). Elsevier. Milan, Italy.
- [4] Fogazzi GB, Grignani S. 1998. Urinary microscopic analysis: an art abandoned by nephrologists? Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation . 13, 10 (1998), 2485-7.
- [5] Fogazzi   GB,   Verdesca   S,   Garigali   G.   2008. Urianalysis:   Core Curriculum 2008. Am J Kidney Dis . 51, 6 (Jun. 2008), 1052-67.
- [6] Gruber, T. R., 1993.   A   Translation Approach   to Portable Ontology Specifications. In: Knowledge Acquisition
- [7] Cote,   Roger  A.,   editor.   Systematized   Nomenclature   of   Human   and Veterinary Medicine: SNOMED International. Northfield (IL): College of   American   Pathologists;   Schaumburg   (IL):   American   Veterinary Medical Association, Version 3.5, 1998.
- [8] Shimoyama,   M.,   Nigam,   R.,   McIntosh,   L.S., Nagarajan,   R.,   Rice, T., Rao,   D.   C.,   , Dwinell,   M.   R.   2012.  Three   Ontologies   to   Define Phenotype Measurement Data. Front Genet, 3:87.
- [9] Cancer   Biomedical   Informatics   Grid,   Unified   Medical   Language System. Logical Observation Identifier Names and Codes. Available in: http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/LOINC. Accessed:   30   Jun 2015.
- [10] Unified Medical Language System. Read Codes, Clinical Terms Version 3. Available in: http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/RCD. Accessed: 30 Jun 2015.
- [11] Unified Medical Language System. Current Procedural Terminology. Available in: http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/CPT. Accessed in: 30 Jun 2015.
- [12] Cancer   Biomedical   Informatics   Grid,   Unified   Medical   Language System.   Medical   Dictionary   for   Regulatory  Activities.  Available   in: http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/MEDDRA. Accessed: 30 Jun 2015.
- [13] Guizzardi G. 2005. Ontological foundations for structural conceptual models .   Doctoral   Thesis.   Centre   for   Telematics   and   Information Technology (CTIT), Enschede.
- [14] Grau , B. C., Horrocks, I., Motik, B., Parsia, B., Patel-Schenider, P., Sattler, U. 2008.   OWL 2: The next step for OWL. Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web . 6, 4, (Nov. 2008), 309-322.
- [15] Guizzardi,   G.,   Wagner,   G.   2010.   Using   the   Unified   Foundational Ontology (UFO) as a Foundation for General Conceptual Modeling Languages. Theory   and   Applications   of   Ontology:   Computer Applications . Springer, Netherlands.
- [16] P. Hitzler, M. Krötzsch, B. Parsia, P. F. Patel-Schneider, S. Rudolph. 2012. OWL  2   Web   Ontology   Language   Primer   (Second   Edition) . Available in http://www.w3.org/TR/2012/REC-owl2-primer-20121211/. Accessed 30 Apr 2015.
- [17] M. Horridge, N. Drummond, J. Goodwin, A. L. Rector, R. Stevens, H. Wang. 2006. The Manchester OWL Syntax. OWLed - Proceedings of CEUR Workshop , v. 216.
- [18] Horrocks I, Patel-Schneider PF, Boley H, Tabet S, Grosof B, Dean M. 2004. SWRL: A Semantic Web Rule Language Combining OWL and RuleML.   Available   in: http://www.w3.org/Submission/2004/SUBMSWRL-20040521/. Accessed 30 Apr 2014.
- [19] The W3C SPARQL Working Group. 2013. SPARQL 1.1 Overview . Available in: http://www.w3.org/TR/2013/REC-sparql11-overview20130321/. Accessed 30 Apr 2015.
- [20] Horridge, M., Bechhofer, S. 2011. The OWL API: A Java API for OWL Ontologies. Sem Web J. 2, 1 (2011), 11-21.
