## NWPOntology: A well-founded Ontology for the Numerical Weather Prediction Data Domain

Tiago Duarte Neves 1 , Ivanildo Babosa 1 , Kelli de Faria Cordeiro 1,2

1 Military Institute of Engineering (IME), Rio de Janeiro - RJ 22290-270, Brazil

2  Center of Naval System Analysis of Brazilian Navy, Rio de Janeiro - RJ 20091-000, Brazil

tiago.duarte@ime.eb.br, ivanildo@ime.eb.br, kelli@marinha.mil.br

Abstract. Weather forecasting is an important application of Science to plan daily  activities,  being  used  in  agriculture,  air  traffic,  sea,  forestry,  severe weather  alerts,  military  operations  and  enterprise  systems.  The  weather forecast  information  is  provided  by  several  systems  with  different  formats, parameters  and  with  a  large  number  of  heterogeneous  concepts  used  in different  organizations.  To  minimize  this  problem,  the  number  of  these heterogeneous concepts must be reduced in order to provide uniform access for better decision making. This article describes the construction of a wellfounded ontology for the Numerical Weather Prediction data domain (NWPOntology),  developed  from  philosophically  based  foundations  of  the Unified Foundational  Ontology  as  a  solution  to  promote  the  semantic enrichment  of  data  from  meteorological  observations,  aiming  to  reduce conceptual ambiguities.

## 1. Introduction

Existing weather forecast centers focus on presenting data to the forecaster supporting some important decisions. Most of the data analysis and assembling key decisions in a forecasting policy takes place in the minds of analysts. This is usually transformed into forecast products finished in a simple text editor with large amounts of complex, semistructured and multivariate data, having to interpret them in a short time. Therefore, one of the biggest challenges in geospatial research is to generate accurate data.

In  Meteorology,  it  is  necessary  ensure  data  consistency  in  the  most  efficient way.  Inconsistencies  and  variations  in  the  data  forecasting  series  may  occur  due  to several reasons, such as, human error in data acquisition, inadequate maintenance and calibration of the measuring instrument, erroneous data processing, random variations expected for any weather phenomenon and changes in the surrounding environment. In this context, the weather forecasting centers may use different syntaxes and terminologies for describing information as well as the same term may have different meanings and interpretations in different organizations.

For example, in the sentence "Maps of daily temperature and precipitation are produced," an expert would recognize that the observation is "temperature" but could not determine the details related to the temperature concept (atmospheric temperature, sea  surface  temperature,  etc.).  He  needs  to  ask  the  data  provider  to  get  more  details [Masmoudi  et  al.  2020].  Additionally,  in  different  disciplines,  the  same  term  may correspond to various meanings, in one hand. For example, the term 'environment' is defined as 'the biological and abiotic elements surrounding an individual organism,' in the biological domain.  However, it refers to 'all the natural components of the Earth (air, water, oils, etc.)' [Sauvé et al. 2016].

On  the  other  hand,  various  terms  may  correspond  to  the  same  meaning.  For instance, the Observatory of Sahara and Sahel (OSS) may use the word 'rainfall' for the same real-world feature that usually refers   to 'precipitation' in   other   sources.   The variety      of      terms  complicates  the  work  of  emergency  responders  who  should  be familiar  with  the  terms  used  in  each  discipline  [Masmoudi  et  al.  2020].  Another situation that occurs in an organization might use the term 'river', while another might use the term 'lake' to describe the concept 'water area' [Khantong and Ahmad 2019]. Consequently, although the meanings of the concepts for describing information from these  organizations  are  similar,  stakeholders  and  computational  systems  in  different organizations cannot understand the meanings.

Semantic Sensor Web (SSW), SWEET and Next Generation Network Enabled Weather (NNEW) are ontologies designed to represent the domain of weather data (to be detailed in the Section2), but they did not emphasize numerical weather prediction, which  is  essential  for  an  area  that  is  constantly  evolving.  To  provide  conceptual methodological support for the  exchange  of  knowledge  on  Numerical  Weather Prediction Data, NWPOntology is being developed, a domain ontology for numerical weather prediction  data  based  on  Ontology  of  Unified  Foundational  Ontology  (UFO) [Guizzardi 2005]  to support a  future  decision-making  system.  The  adoption  of NWPOntology could improve the safety of marine navigation by users as well as the semantic accuracy of that data by Command and Control applications, e.g.,   Search and Rescue operations.

This  document  introduces  NWPOntology  as  follows:  Section  2  reviews  some related work from ontology in weather data domain; Section 3 details NWPOntology; and finally, Section 4 presents final observations and topics for further investigation.

## 2. Related Work

There exists a huge number of sensor networks around the globe designed to monitor a large set of different phenomena, creating a vast amount of data. Making them available demands to structure such data as well as to allow the interoperability between different sensor networks. Semantic Sensor Web (SSW) is an approach that builds upon Sensor Web Enablement (SWE) [Reed et al. 2007] and Semantic Web activities by the W3C [W3C 2020] which aims at annotating sensor data with semantic metadata to increase interoperability and to provide contextual information essential for situational knowledge  [Sheth  et  al.  2008].  Semantic  metadata  includes  spatial,  temporal,  and thematic data.

The  SSW  ontology  does  not  support  forecast  values.  However,  it  would  be possible to extend the SSW  ontology to implement them. In the context of NWPOntology, the concept Observations ,  as well as its subconcepts, could be reused; however, some additional subconcepts should to be added. The Basic (WGS84 lat/long) for location [Brickley 2004] and OWLTime [Hobbs and Pan 2006] can be used by the NWPOntology without the use of the SSW ontology.

Another  approach  towards  a  semantically-enriched  sensor  network,  based  on SWE, is an OWL 2 ontology created by the W3C Semantic Sensor Network Incubator group (SSN-XG) which is referred to as the SSN Ontology [Compton et al. 2012]. The goal  of  this  ontology  is  to  simplify  managing,  querying,  and  combining  sensors  and observation data from different sensor networks. Different perspectives can be used to view  the  knowledge  base,  including:  the  sensor  perspective  (which  sensors  are available;  what  and  how  do  they  sense),  the  observation  perspective  (focusing  on observations and related metadata), the system perspective (systems of sensors), and the property perspective (properties of physical phenomena and how they are sensed).

SWEET is a set of more than 200 ontologies comprising about 6000 concepts [Savi ć et  al.  2019].  The  initial  version  dates  back  to  2003  and  based  on  DAML+OIL [Connolly et al. 2001, Raskin and Pan  2003]. Works  regarding  environmental applications include integrating volcanic and atmospheric data in the context of volcanic eruptions [Fox et al. 2007], an ontology of earth's crust fractures [Zhong et al. 2009] and an  extension  of  SWEET  by  climate  and  forecast  terms  [Ramachandran  and  Raskin 2006].

In  the  context  of  weather  forecasting,  SWEET  ontologies  are  a  well-qualified approach  for  reusing  them  in  a  climate  ontology.  Time  definitions,  and  geographical position specifications are supported. However, SWEET comes with some disadvantages, which ultimately led to the decision not to use them in the implementation of NWPOntology to support a future decision-making system: it does not  currently  cover  future  events,  as  well  as  does  not  cover  all  weather  elements relevant  to  numerical  weather  prediction  data,  e.g.,  numerical  weather  prediction models.

The Next Generation Network Enabled Weather (NNEW) ontology is designed to  provide  a  comprehensive  view  on  the  weather  across  the  country,  built  from thousands of single weather observations. One of the tasks foreseen for the system was the development of ontologies for the meteorological domain, mainly for the reduction of  delays  related  to  the  climate  in  the  airspace  of  the  USA  to  half  of  its  current magnitude. Recently, approximately 70 percent of all air traffic delays are attributable to weather [Blasch et al. 2019].

This  ontology  was  built  with  respect  to  SWEET  ontologies  to  map  weather phenomena. Extensions to SWEET include additional weather phenomena and concepts and  relations  that  lead  to  the  4-D  Wx  Data  Cube  (Four  Dimensional  Weather  Data Cube)  which  uses  time  as  the  fourth dimension  for  the 'location'  of  weather observations.  Just  like  SWEET,  NNEW  ontology  does  not  address  the  context  of weather predictions. This was the reason for not using this ontology.

The Section 2 discusses no existing foundational ontology covers the domain of numerical weather prediction data, in a way suitable for using it as a starting point for NWPOntology.  Thus,  the  creation  of  NWPOntology  was  based  on  UFO  conceptual requirements, reusing of existing meteorological ontology concepts (see Section3). The ability  to  clearly  express  concepts of the real-world, reducing conceptual ambiguities, leads  the  scientific  community,  as  well  as  conceptual  modeling  professionals,  to consider UFO as an important resource to model the domain ontologies.

## 3. NWPOntology: A well-founded Ontology for the Numerical Weather Prediction Data Domain

Detailed surveys on ontology development methodologies can be found in the works of [Corcho et al.  2003,  Iqbal  et  al.  2013].  To  construct  NWPOntology  the  methodology used was the Systematic Approach to Build Ontologies (SABiO) [Falbo 2014]. SABiO methodology  having  been  created  to  support  the  development  of  domain  reference ontologies and assumes that domain ontologies must be developed based on foundational ontology. The ontology development process comprises five main phases: Purpose  Identification  and  Requirements  Specification;  Capture  and  Formalization  of Ontology; Project and Test.

In  the  Purpose  Identification  and  Requirements  Specification  phase,  it  was defined that NWPOntology aims to serve as a shared conceptualization to resolve the semantic  heterogeneity  caused  by  divergent  interpretations  of  data  according  to  the different contexts in which they are used, and the green part of the model will support an analytical environment of historical events. Its main objective is the modeling and implementation of a domain ontology for numerical weather prediction data (NWPOntology),  as  a  solution  to  reduce  the  conceptual  ambiguities  of  the  weather forecast  data  existing  in  the  various  forecast  centers,  promoting  semantic  enrichment meteorological observation data. In this way, the information can be observed, analyzed and disseminated by weather reports, assisting in the decision making process.

The focus of the Capture and Formalization phase is to capture the conceptualization of the discourse universe. Relevant concepts and relationships must be identified and organized. This phase begins with conceptual modeling using highly expressive  languages  to  create  strongly  axiomatized  ontologies  that  are  as  close  as possible to the domain's ideal ontology. The focus of these languages should be on the adequacy  of  the  representation  of  the  main  concepts  and  relationships  in  the  domain using taxonomies.

The  NWPOntology  fragment  presented  in  this  article  is  based  mainly  on  the taxonomy  of  meteorological  data  terms  proposed  in  [Da  Cruz  et  al.  2015].  Other concepts  found  in  NWPOntology  were  obtained  by  reusing  the  concepts  of  previous knowledge resources, such as GeoSPARQL [OGC 2020], INSPIRE [INSPIRE 2019], ISO 19156:2011 [ISO 2011], GEneral Multilingual Environmental Thesaurus [GEMET 2020] and World Meteorological Organization Glossary [WMO 2020]. In formalization, what is intended is to explicitly represent the conceptualization captured in the previous stage  with  the  use  of  informal  axioms  written  in  a  formal  language,  with  OntoUML being chosen to play this role.

NWPOntology  model  illustrated  in  Figure  1,  making  the  distinction  between different  types  of  entities  explicit  in  the  ontological  sense.  The  UFO-B  stereotypes present  in  our  modeling  (the  green  part)  were  adapted  from  [Botti  Benevides  et  al. 2019].

Figure 1. NWPOntology model based on UFO-A and UFO-B

[FIGURE]

The  meteorological  parameters,  modeled  as  the  &lt;kind&gt;  stereotype,  is  used  to represent rigid concepts, that provide an identity principle for their instances and do not require a relational dependency. They are basically divided into variables, e.g., values of relative humidity, precipitation, surface wind, air temperature and sea surface temperature, atmospheric pressure, and cloudiness. Such concepts are modeled by the &lt;subkind&gt; stereotype, so they have their own identities and inherit the properties of the meteorological  parameters  class.  In  this  case,  the  data  subtypes  were  mapped  as  a &lt;subkind&gt;  sortal,  precisely  because  they  are  unique,  but  at  the  same  time  inherit characteristics in common.

Furthermore, according to our model, they are observed by the Global Observation  Systems  sensors,  that  was  modeled  by  the  &lt;kind&gt;  stereotype,  which  is mapped by the formal relationship created between the Global Observation System and the  observed  meteorological  parameters.  These  data  are  received  at  the  National Meteorological Services (modeled by the &lt;kind&gt; stereotype) and the data is transformed into a graphical visualization, through the Local Data Managers (LDM).  The LDM was modeled by the  &lt;role&gt;  stereotype,  because  is  a  construct  used  to  represent  anti-rigid specializations of identity providers, in this case the Software Agent, that was modeled by the &lt;kind&gt; stereotype.

Meteorological data transformed into a graphical visualization is observed by the Weather  Forecasters  and  compared  with  the  data  generated  by  the  outputs  of  the Regional  Numerical  Models.  Weather  forecasters,  modeled  by  the  &lt;role&gt;  stereotype, which has its identity principle inherit by the National Meteorological Services class. Regional Numerical Models, modeled by the &lt;subkind&gt; stereotype, for they have their own identities and inherit the properties of the Numerical Weather Prediction Models class, modeled by the &lt;kind&gt; stereotype.

Global Numerical Models, modeled by the &lt;subkind&gt; stereotype, for they have their own identities and inherit the properties of the Numerical   Weather Prediction models  class,  input  the  meteorological  parameters  data  for  the  Regional  Numerical models. If there are no discrepancies between the outputs of the numerical models and the  meteorological  data  of  the  LDM,  the  Weather  Forecaster  produces  the  Weather Forecast, modeled by the &lt;kind&gt; stereotype to be disseminated as the Weather Reports, modeled by the &lt;datatype&gt; stereotype. This stereotype represents data whose members are numerical values belonging to a given set of possible values. A concept represented as a &lt;datatype&gt; is a theoretical representation of a conceptual space and the restrictions imposed by its respective geometric structures [Guizzardi and Wagner et al. 2004]. A value  does  not  have  an  identity,  so  two  occurrences  of  the  same  value  cannot  be differentiated [Guizzardi 2005], that occurred in a certain location and during a certain time.

Severe Weather Events refers to any dangerous meteorological phenomena with the potential to cause damage, serious social disruption, or loss of human life. Types of Severe  Weather  Events  vary  depending  on  the  latitude,  altitude,  topography  and atmospheric  conditions.  High  winds,  hail,  excessive  precipitation  and  wildfires  are forms  and  effects  of  severe  weather,  as  are  thunderstorms,  downbursts,  tornadoes, waterspouts,  tropical  cyclones,  and  extratropical  cyclones,  and  should  be  released through weather reports as soon as possible to users [WMO 2020].

Severe Weather Events consist of a complex event that brings about the victim or  property  to  a  damage  situation,  represented  at  the  time  (Severe  Weather  Event Moment), when the victim or property suffers that damage. A Severe Weather Events only  occurs  if  it  is  triggered  by  a  situation  of  significant  change  in  atmospheric parameters (Severe Weather Indicators). An example of a Severe Weather Event would be a Tropical Cyclone occurring in a given location, causing material damage and death to people.

## 4. Final considerations

The need to reduce the conceptual ambiguities of meteorological data, which make up the Global Observation System, motivated the construction of NWPOntology, aiming at an open and generic approach to interoperability between the different systems for the correct  decision  making.  To  complete  the  development  of  the  ontology  it  is  still necessary  to  have  a  dynamic  verification  and  validation  of  the  behavior  of  the operational  ontology,  in  a  finite  set  of  test  cases  against  the  expected  behavior  in relation to Competence Questions (CQs). Investigations and experiments in NWPOntology  are  still  needed,  mainly  with  regard  to  studies  on  UFO-B  event stereotypes, as the incorporation of new entities is necessary, such as material damage caused by serious climatic events in regions of the world potentially affected. Therefore, future research can benefit from the ontological concepts identified in this research.

## References

- Blasch, E. P., Insaurralde, C. C., Costa, P., De Waal, A. and De Villiers, J. P. (2019). Uncertainty  Ontology  for  Veracity  and  Relevance.  In 2019  22th  International Conference on Information Fusion (FUSION) (pp. 1-8). IEEE.
- Botti Benevides, A., Bourguet, J. R., Guizzardi, G., Peñaloza, R. and Almeida, J. P. A. (2019). Representing a reference foundational ontology of events in SROIQ. Applied Ontology , 14 (3), 293-334.
- Brickley D., editor. (2004). Basic Geo (WGS84 lat/long) Vocabulary. http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/. Accessed: 2020-03-08.
- Compton, M., Barnaghi, P., Bermudez, L., GarcíA-Castro, R., Corcho, O., Cox, S. and Huang, V. (2012). The SSN ontology of the W3C semantic sensor network incubator group. Journal of Web Semantics , 17 , 25-32.
- Connolly, D., van Harmelen, F., Horrocks, I., McGuinness, D. L., Patel-Schneider, P. F. and Stein, L. A. (2001). DAML+ OIL (2001) Reference Description. W3C Note, 18 December (2001). Accessed: 2020-03-05. Latest version available at http://www.w3.org/TR/daml+oil-reference.
- Corcho, O., Fernández-López, M., Gómez-Pérez, A. (2003). Methodologies, tools and languages for building ontologies. Where is their meeting point? Data Knowl Eng 46(1):41-64.
- Da Cruz, S.  et  al.  (2015).  Gestão  Semântica  de  Dados  Meteorológicos  Apoiados  Por Ontologias de Proveniência. In: Anais do IX Brazilian e-Science Workshop. SBC, p. 61-70
- Falbo, R.D.A. (2014). SABiO: Systematic Approach for Building Ontologies. In ONTO. COM/ODISE@ FOIS .
- Fox,  P.,  McGuinness,  D.,  Raskin,  R.  and  Sinha,  K.  (2007).  A  volcano  erupts: semantically mediated integration of heterogeneous volcanic and atmospheric data. In  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  first  workshop  on  CyberInfrastructure:  information management in eScience (pp. 1-6).
- GEMET-Concepts  (2020).  General  European  Multilingual  Environmental  Thesaurus, Version. 4.1.4 - Rapport under Contract of the European Environment Agency.
- Guizzardi,  G.,  Wagner,  G.,  Sinderen, et  al .  (2004).  "An  Ontologically  Well-Founded Profile for UML Conceptual Models", In: Proceedings of the 16th International. Conference on Advances in Information Systems Engineering , pp. 112-126.
- Guizzardi, G. (2005). Ontological Foundations for Structural Conceptual Models. PhD Thesis, University of Twente, Netherlands.
- Hobbs,  J.  R.  and  Pan,  F.  (2006).  Time  ontology  in  OWL.  W3C  working  draft,  27 September 2006. World Wide Web Consortium .
- INSPIRE (2019). Infrastructure for Spatial Information in Europe. Available: https://inspire.ec.europa.eu/. Accessed: 2020-03-12.
- Iqbal, R., Murad, M.A.A., Mustapha, A., Sharef, N.M. (2013). An analysis of ontology engineering  methodologies:  a  literature  review.  Res  J  Appl  Sci  Eng  Technol 6(16):2993-3000.
- ISO (2011). ISO 19156:2011 -Geographic information -Observations and measurements.
- Khantong,  S.  and  Ahmad,  M.  N.  (2019).  An  Ontology  for  Sharing  and  Managing Information in Disaster Response: In Flood Response Usage Scenarios. Journal on Data Semantics , 1-14.
- Masmoudi, M., Karray, M. H., Lamine, S. B. A. B., Zghal, H. B. and Archimede, B. (2020). MEMOn: Modular Environmental Monitoring Ontology to link heterogeneous  Earth  observed  data.  Environmental  Modelling  &amp;  Software,  124, 104581.
- OGC (2020).  Open  Geospatial  Consortium  |  OGC®.  http://www.opengeospatial.org/. Accessed: 2020-03-12.
- Ramachandran, R., Graves, S. and Raskin, R. (2006). Ontology re-engineering use case: Extending SWEET to map climate and forecasting vocabulary terms. In AGU Spring Meeting Abstracts.
- Raskin, R. and Pan, M. (2003). Semantic web for earth and environmental terminology (sweet). In Proc. of the Workshop on Semantic Web Technologies for Searching and Retrieving Scientific Data (Vol. 25).
- Reed,  C.,  Botts,  M.,  Davidson,  J.  and  Percivall,  G.  (2007).  OGC®  Sensor  Web Enablement: Overview and High Level Achhitecture. In 2007 IEEE Autotestcon (pp. 372-380). IEEE.
- Sauvé,  S.,  Bernard,  S.  and  Sloan,  P.  (2016).  Environmental  sciences,  sustainable development  and  circular  economy:  Alternative  concepts  for  trans-disciplinary research, In Environmental Development, Volume 17, 48-56, ISSN 2211-4645.
- Savi ć ,  M.,  Ivanovi ć ,  M.  and  Jain,  L.  C.  (2019).  Analysis  of  ontology  networks.  In Complex  Networks  in  Software,  Knowledge,  and  Social  Systems (pp.  143-175). Springer, Cham.
- Sheth, A., Henson, C., and Sahoo, S. S. (2008). Semantic Sensor Web. IEEE Internet computing , 12 (4), 78-83.
- WMO.  (2020). WMO  Sea-ice  Nomenclature:  Terminology,  Codes  and  Illustrated Glossary . Secretariat of the World Meteorological Organization.
- W3C (2020). Semantic Sensor Network Incubator Group. http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/ssn/. Accessed: 2020-03-12.
- Zhong, J., Aydina, A. and McGuinness, D. L. (2009). Ontology of fractures. Journal of Structural Geology, 31(3), 251-259.
