[FIGURE]

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Data &amp; Knowledge Engineering

[journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/datak](http://www.elsevier.com/locate/datak)

## Anartifact ontology for design science research

Hans Weigand a, ∗ , Paul Johannesson b , Birger Andersson b

- a TiSEM, Tilburg University, P.O. Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands
- b Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, 164 07 Kista, Sweden

## A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords: Design science IT artifact Ontology

UFO

## 1. Introduction

Design Science Research [1] has grown in popularity in the Information Systems field. Whereas empirical sciences acquire knowledge about the natural world (physics) or human behavior (social sciences), Design Science Research (DSR) is interested in IT artifacts, such as algorithms, methods and modeling languages, and the effectiveness of their use. In its focus on artificial objects, DSR bears similarities with traditional engineering sciences and medicine. Building artifacts and evaluating artifacts in context is often seen as the core of DSR. But what is an artifact? Is any solution an artifact? What exactly do we say when we call something an IS artifact? Although by now there is a substantial body of literature about design science, in the form of research articles and textbooks, a systematic investigation of the artifact concept is still missing. The goal of this conceptual paper is to introduce a general artifact ontology for use in DSR, rooted in the foundational ontology UFO [2,3] and from there develop an ontology of IS artifacts. We also derive practical implications for Design Science Research.

In the field of engineering sciences, there has been quite some reflection on the ontological status of artifacts. Where one (materialistic) extreme views them as just physical objects, fully determined by their physical properties, the other intentionalist extreme views them as a separate kind, as the physical reduction would miss the artifact function or purpose that is assumed to be essential. In the applied ontology field, work has been done on the formalization of this analysis, using ontological frameworks such as DOLCE; notably the work of Borgo and colleagues [4,5]. However, this work is not yet integrated into the UFO ontology. It is mostly concerned with traditional technical artifacts and does not discuss IS artifacts nor DSR in general.

The theoretical contribution of this paper is to work out an ontological account of the artifact and the related design process. This account can be useful for the further development of DSR methods. Although the paper is not aimed at the philosophical discourse, it may contribute.

Validation of an ontology is not empirical. In [6], it is argued that validation should be based on competency questions. On the basis of our literature review (Section 2, 3), relevant competency questions for an artifact ontology are given in Table 1. The numbers refer to sections where the questions are answered.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: H.Weigand@uvt.nl (H. Weigand), pajo@dsv.su.se (P. Johannesson), ba@dsv.su.se (B. Andersson).

Available online 17 March 2021

## A B S T R A C T

From a design science perspective, information systems and their components are viewed as artifacts. However, not much has been written yet on the ontological status of artifacts or their structure. After March &amp; Smith's (1995) initial classification of artifacts in terms of models, constructs, methods and instantiations, there have been only a few attempts to come up with a more systematic approach. This conceptual paper provides an ontological analysis of the notion of artifact grounded in the foundational ontology UFO. Its core is an ontological characterization of artifacts, and technical objects in general from a Design Science Research perspective, developed in conversation with other approaches. This general artifact ontology is applied in a systematic classification of IS artifacts. We include practical implications for Design Science Research.

[FIGURE]

[FIGURE]

| Table 1 Competency questions for an (IS) artifact ontology.   | Table 1 Competency questions for an (IS) artifact ontology.         | Table 1 Competency questions for an (IS) artifact ontology.   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| Q1                                                            | Is any artificial object an artifact?                               | 4.1, 4.2                                                      |
| Q2                                                            | What is the relationship between an artifact and its material base? | (3.5), 4.4                                                    |
| Q3                                                            | What characterizes the design of an artifact?                       | 4.8                                                           |
| Q4                                                            | How do artifacts relate to each other?                              | 4.6                                                           |
| Q5                                                            | What are IT artifacts and what are IS artifacts?                    | 5.1, 5.2                                                      |
| Q6                                                            | What is the role of the user in artifact design?                    | 4.9                                                           |
| Q7                                                            | How can an artifact instance be malfunctional?                      | 4.4, 4.8                                                      |
| Q8                                                            | Do the functions of an artifact coincide with how it is used?       | 4.1, 4.5                                                      |
| Q9                                                            | Is an instantiation (such as an IT implementation) a DSR artifact?  | 4.10, 5.3                                                     |
| Q10                                                           | What is the role of models in DSR?                                  | 5.4                                                           |

The structure of this paper is as follows. In Sections 2 and 3, we recapitulate what has been written on the artifact concept in the DSR literature and the philosophy of technology. In conversation with this literature, we present in Section 4 our general artifact ontology grounded in the foundational ontology UFO [2] and represented in OntoUML. 1 On the basis of this ontology, we analyze the main IS artifacts and their interrelationships in Section 5 and discuss practical implications for DSR researchers. The paper is an extension of [7]. The extension concerns specifically the formal artifact ontology (Section 4) and its philosophical basis (Section 3), apart from many small adaptations.

## 2. Artifacts in design science research the current status

A general understanding of artifact in Design Science Research is that it is an object made by humans with the intention that it is used to address a practical problem [8,9]. DSR arose in the 1990's within the field of Information Systems and although its idea of artifacts included physical artifacts like hammers or medical drugs, its interest went mainly in the direction of symbolic artifacts such as encountered in the Information System domain. The classical DSR work of Simon, The Sciences of the Artificial [10], described computers and artificial intelligence software as artificial objects. Although Simon is not very explicit, he seems to regard a design object as more specific than an artificial object, witness the fact that he views markets being the result of a social evolution process as artificial objects but without a designer. Also quite broad is the definition of Gregor and Hevner [11]: 'We argue toward a more expansive view of the IT artifact to include any designed solution that solves a problem in context'. Wieringa's ([12]:29) definition is comparable: 'an artifact is something created by people for some practical purpose'. He prefers to talk about treatments. What the design researcher designs is a treatment, that is, 'a desired interaction between the artifact and the problem context' and he defines design as 'a decision about what to do'. There is a risk that the artifact concept loses its meaning if it includes any decision or any solution. To keep the connection with both common sense and the technical sciences and to able to give substance to the design aspect, an artifact must have something of ''an object made by humans''. At the same time, we think a proper definition should do justice to the intuitions of Gregor and Wieringa and this is one of the challenges for an ontology of artifacts.

## 2.1. Design research outcome: artifacts vs. theory

According to Purao [13], characteristic for design research is the situated implementation of an invention (artifact) as software or system. Apart from that, he argues that design research should produce knowledge and understanding, which sometimes he calls artifacts as well. Pursuing this second suggestion, Winter [14] proposes ''theory'' to be a relevant artifact type. Although the scholars are right in stressing that design research should not just produce an instantiated artifact but contribute to theory [15], it is confusing to take this scientific theory to be the design artifact. That would make all sciences design sciences. The underlying problem is that the artifact is identified with the research outcome.

Goldkuhl &amp; Lind [16] make a distinction between artifacts as objects of empirical design practices and abstract design knowledge (see also more recently [17]). This is a useful distinction to start with, as long as we do not conflate again the meta-artifacts (their terminology) on the abstract design level with design knowledge about these artifacts. This knowledge requires an identification of the meta-artifact but goes beyond the identification by developing, for instance, mathematical models of the artifact or by accumulating experimental results about its performance.

As science in general abstracts from the concrete, so design knowledge abstracts from specific application contexts. This holds in particular for design knowledge as pursued in DSR. The level of abstraction is usually not as high as e.g. in physics. Wieringa [74:10] uses the term ''middle-range generalization''. In the opposition concrete vs. abstract it is often overlooked that there is also an aggregation dimension [18]. For instance, in the IT field, there are infinitely many possible programs, with all kinds of variations. These are not all interesting DSR artifacts. IT researchers are typically more focused on developing components , e.g. in the form of a method library, than end products. The components are not necessarily more abstract than integrated systems, but more elementary . It makes sense to see these components as tangible DSR outcomes, and the knowledge thereof as design knowledge.

In contrast, evaluation studies in the domain of (Management) Information Systems typically look at the effect of the end product (as blackbox) in some use context. The intended outcome of this type of research does not consist of new artifacts, but of knowledge on the use properties and the effectiveness of some artifact type (e.g. the type ERP system). In our view, the IT and IS perspective complement each other. Sometimes, it is the case that the IT research provides knowledge about the technical feasibility and performance of the artifact and the IS research extends the design knowledge by studying its effects in context. In other cases, the two work on different aggregation levels: the IT research studying the effects of some component in the use context of the integrated IT system, and the IS research looking at the effects of the integrated system in the use context of an enterprise.

[1 https://ontouml.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html.](https://ontouml.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html)

## 2.2. Socio-technical artifacts

We consider IS artifacts to be research objects or units of analysis what the design knowledge is about. From a Computer Science perspective, the Information System is the information technology that does data processing. The management view on Information Systems sees the object as much broader, including the business processes that use the IT, the humans involved and the organizational structure around it. The Information System, defined in this way, can be called a socio-technical system as it includes not only a technical component but also people. Sometimes the IT itself is called a socio-technical artifact. According to Silver and Markus ([19]:82-83) IT artifacts 'have both technical and social design features and are therefore better regarded as SocioTechnical (ST) artifacts'....'We define the IT artifact as a sociotechnical assemblage.' As pointed out, among others, by Alter [20], we should be cautious with terms like socio-technical artifacts or ensemble artifacts, as if there are also other artifacts that do not have social design features. Arguably, a software application, as any artifact, exists in the historical reality in which technical aspects and social aspects (in a broad sense) are intertwined in many ways [21]. The application has been designed by humans, driven consciously or unconsciously by social values. Once implemented it falls under legal rules, has an economic value, has an effect on social relationships, etc.. However, that does not make these applications socio-technical in the original sense [22].

Alter [20] provocatively suggests avoiding the vague term IT artifact completely, especially when it is applied to something just containing IT, like an airplane, or related to IT, like user training. In the following, we will keep using the terms IT and IS artifact but we will avoid the term socio-technical artifact. A precise characterization of the artifact concept and the exploration of all meaningful artifacts in the IS domain is the subject of this paper.

## 2.3. Artifact vs. system

Both in Simon [10] and in more recent DSR publications [23] the words artifact and system are sometimes used as synonyms. This is problematic. A system is defined as a composite of elements with attributes and relationships between them that makes a meaningful whole. 'The idea of holism which assumes that particular parts can be described only by the knowledge of their meaning and position in the whole, is the basis of the conception of the perception of reality as complex systems' [24]. From its early beginnings, system theory embraces both natural and artificial systems. System theory is not so much about a particular class of objects, but is a particular view: the holistic view, in contrast to a reductionist view. The market can be seen as a complex system, or a family. So clearly not every system is an artifact or even an artificial object. One can say that an artifact is a system, as indeed the elements of a composite artifact have a function in the whole, so they cannot be characterized exhaustively on their own. A system view on the artifact deemphasizes the role of the designer intention and focuses on understanding how the overall behavior derives or emerges from its parts. In our view, it makes sense to include somehow the system view to the artifact definition (see 4.6). However, the Information System including humans is not the output of intentional design. Many elements of the system, not only the IT but also e.g. an authorization scheme, can be designed, and may be viewed as artifacts or artifact components.

That we must be cautious to equate system and artifact is supported, be it in other wordings, by management researchers. Pandza and Thorpe [25] expressed skepticism about the work of Van Aken [26] and others who advocate a design research approach to management. If design is taken in the traditional engineering sense, then it only has a limited applicability in management. Pandza describes organizations as social artifacts that evolve over time in unpredictable ways. This evolution could be called path-creation design , because it also depends on social processes and human creative intervention. The question is whether the word design is still appropriate and in what sense the organization is a social artifact (cf. [27] for a discussion of different interpretations of the term ''design thinking''). For the question to be meaningful, an ontological grounding of the artifact concept is needed first.

## 2.4. Typology of IS artifacts

Some work has been done on a typology of IS artifacts, but surprisingly little. March and Smith, followed by Hevner et al. [1,28], describe artifacts as the outcome of design research, distinguishing four typical types: constructs, models, methods and instantiations. The motivation is brief, but it seems that for March and Smith, models are at the core. Constructs provide the language to build models. Methods are described as ways to implement models, and instantiations as the integrated result. The March and Smith proposal has been broadly accepted. Alternatively, based on a literature review of actual design research projects, Offermann et al. [29] identified eight relevant artifact types: notation, requirement, metric, system design, method, algorithm, guideline and pattern. The paper does not try to analyze ontologically how these types are related. It should also be noted that the scope of their literature review was mainly design research conferences, and not the IS literature as a whole.

A different way of classifying IS artifacts is by means of their function. Iivari [30] distinguished seven functions: to automate, to augment, to mediate, to inform, to entertain, to create art, and to accompany. Each function characterizes an archetypical IT application. In contrast to March &amp; Smith's [28] general design science approach, Iivari's classification is more specific to the IS domain, but it also lacks ontological analysis. It can be used to classify current IT artifacts on the basis of their use.

## 2.5. Ontology of IT artifacts

Wang et al. [31] provided a detailed ontological analysis of software . They follow Osterweil [32] in describing software as something non-physical and intangible. They do not agree with proposals that identify the program with the code. The reason given for the distinction is that software can be updated, so can have different codes at different times, while a code becomes different by each change (the paper talks about changes in the syntactic structure that include variable renaming and inclusion of a comment, so apparently any change apart from layout). This latter claim is disputable. As in the Ship of Theseus example (see below), it is possible to replace a plank while the ship keeps its identity.

According to Wang et al. [31], 'when a code is in the circumstance that somebody, with a kind of act of baptism , intends to produce certain effects on a computer, a new entity emerges ... a computer program'. Again, we have some remarks. First, it feels odd that the code is presented to be there before the program emerges. Usually, there is a program design first. Secondly, the paper continues to write that the program is not a physical object as it lacks a location in space but why is code inside space and the baptized code suddenly outside space? In our view, the issues are caused by a lack of attention to the design itself. We have a problem with calling a program instance non-physical and at the same time saying that it is constituted by (physical) code. However, we do agree that code and program must be distinguished, and also that a program can be distinguished from a software system (where the former has an effect in the computer internally and the latter externally, in/via the interface).

Coming from outside the IS domain, the Information Artifact Ontology (IAO, [33]) provides an ontological account of information content entities (ICE) such as document, databases and digital images. An ICE is defined as an entity that is 'generically dependent on some material entity and which stands in a relation of aboutness to some [other] entity'. The material entity can be the disk, the other entity can be the person depicted in the digital image ICE. An ICE can be concretized in an information carrier (e.g. a copy of the image). In follow-up work [34], a distinction is made between the information artifact and information quality entity. The information artifact is the disk or paper itself viewed purely physically, that is used to bear information. Although our ontology will be structured differently, with more emphasis on the design, we concur with IAO with respect to the material basis of information artifacts. The work in [34] is a detailed analysis of the ''aboutness'' relation, and how to deal with cases where the entity that the information content entity is about does not exist. In our view, this analysis is useful when we are talking about language and mental states. However, we regard that as belonging to language ontology, which is different from - although presupposed in - an information object/text ontology.

## 3. Artifacts in the philosophy of technology

The philosophy of technology is at least as old as Aristotle [35]. Aristotle talks about the wooden statue of Hermes stating that the statue was already hidden in the wood before the artist arrived. Aristotle's definition of knowledge as knowledge of causes, where causes are fourfold (material, efficient, formal and telic) can be applied easily to artifacts, as Aristotle did himself. Artifacts are made of some matter (material cause), have a characteristic arrangement or design (formal), are brought about by some process (efficient) and have a function (telic). The relationship between matter and form is not simple, as illustrated by, the puzzle of the ship of Theseus. If the planks of the ship are all replaced by new ones, at one moment or in the course of time, is it still the same ship? And if the old planks are used for building a house, can we say that the house is the ship of Theseus? We assume that it is possible for Theseus' ship, or Heraclitus' river for that matter, to keep an identity even if its composition evolves; but how? A related puzzle is the notion of function. Do artifacts have a function, or do we give them a function when we adopt them to achieve some goal? In the latter intentionalist stance that is taken by several scholars, functions are somehow dependent on human intentions. Others defend a non-intentionalist account [36] or a hybrid approach.

Within the scope of this paper, we cannot even attempt to cover all the age-old philosophical discussions that continue until today. Our focus is on applied ontology, although we consider some of the recent approaches to the form/matter problem in 3.5. We will come back on the intentionalism discussion in the Conclusion.

## 3.1. Borgo

We start with the work of Borgo [4] because it is positioned in the field of applied ontology: an area that arose in the early 1990s in the field of knowledge representation and that aims at a formal rigorous analysis of general (rather than application-specific) concepts and how they are organized. Choices that must be made in an applied ontology concern distinctions between universals and particulars; between abstract and concrete (existing in space and time) entities; between endurants and perdurants (roughly said, objects and events); or on roles and co-located entities. Coming to artifacts, Borgo [4] distinguishes between the 'purely physical object or amount of matter' and 'the artifact itself', where artifacts are 'essentially the result of an intentional act of their creator' (cf. [37]). They are recognized as two different entities, with a ''constitution'' relationship between them. For instance, a pebble that gets used as a paper weight, is an object that ''constitutes'' the artifact paper weight. More about constitution will be said below, but it is good to highlight the ontological choice that is made here. An alternative would be to see ''artifact'' as a role that the entity plays in actions, or as a property that an object may or may not have. That would have the disadvantage, according to Borgo that we could not talk about artifacts as sortals nor about the creation of an artifact. Whether these arguments hold, is a matter of discussion, as it depends also on other ontological choices see in particular Thomasson [38] who argues that mind-independence should not the touchstone of reality. According to Borgo, the intentional act of the creator is key. Artifacts are often tools for use, but that is not essential. Another important term in Borgo's account is capacity - one could also talk about capability or potential or set of dispositions. For instance, a raincoat has to capacity to keep dry and warm. This attributed capacity is an extension of the given capacity of the constituting object. Recognizing the given capacity of objects means that the so-called function of the artifact is not purely based on intentions (foam cannot be used for a hammer, for instance, just because the designer would want it). Still, there are attributed capacities; these are capacities (in the same capacity space), but they are the result of an intention like the paperweight capacity in the case of the pebble. The formal part of the paper lists a number of axioms that formalize the choices mentioned and specify additional constraints, e.g. on the component relationship. In [5], Borgo uses the term ontological artifact, which bears on two essential intentional acts: the selection of material resources and the attribution of capacity. The ontological artifact corresponds roughly with what Kroes [39] calls a technical artifact and Kitamura [5] an engineering artifact.

## 3.2. Lawson

The work of Clive Lawson on the ontology of technology [40] is part of the Cambridge social ontology project, more in particular, the Transformational Model of Social Activity. This project aims to think about social phenomena in a philosophical way. It assumes that social structure pre-exists (so it is not only in the agents' mind) but in virtue of the activity that it governs. The structure is reproduced and transformed in the activity, including technical activity. Technical objects extend human capabilities, but technical activities also transform social structures and indirectly have some effect on the human agents. The technical activity is conceptualized then as 'activity undertaken to harness the intrinsic powers of material artifacts in order to extend human capabilities'. By centering on the ''intrinsic powers'' Lawson is close to Borgo, but by adopting the phrase ''extending human capabilities'' he stresses a point - the use context - that for Borgo is not essential. Lawson gives ample attention to the question what powers are harnessed. The way a hammer or pendulum functions is different from the way money functions, or the clock. All are social artifacts in the sense that they are recognized as artifacts and play some function in some cultural context. However, in the first case, physical laws of gravity and motion play a crucial role in its functioning, whereas for money, the physical aspect plays a limited role at best; its functioning draws on social forces. This example illustrates that a distinction should be made between the object with its properties and the harnessed forces. In the case of technical artifacts like a pendulum, the physical forces inhere in the object, but for social artifacts like money, this is not the case. So object capacity and force/powers must be kept distinct in a unifying artifact concept. The powers are only intrinsic in the technical artifact case.

## 3.3. Sperber

The traditional focus in the philosophy of technology is on tools like hammers and jars. This scope has been criticized. According to Sperber [41], it is a heritage from the Paleolithic era where this kind of primitive tools developed. It provides us with an artifact concept that is not representative anymore for modern times (Industrial Revolution, Information Age), but not even for the Neolithic revolution 13,000 years ago where biological cultural artifacts were most common. Examples of biological artifacts are breeded dogs, seedless grapes and live leeches used in classical medicine. They are cultural artifacts as it is their past performance and their intended effect that cause them to be culturally be re-produced. They are biological artifacts as their cultural function is achieved by means of the performance of one of their biological functions. Sperber's main interest is to abolish the natural/artificial distinction as such. We consider Sperber's critique useful and acknowledge that the intertwinement between human agents and their environment is much richer than the Cartesian subject-object dualism suggests, but do not think that this excludes a definition of the artifact.

## 3.4. Simondon

A somewhat idiosyncratic voice is the work of the French philosopher Simondon on the identity of technical objects [18,42]. One thing that Simondon stresses is the processual aspect of the artifact. An artifact is not a thing, but a 'sequence of events', that is, design events. Simondon is especially interested in the development of what is usually called artifact kind, like ''the Diesel engine''. The evolution of such an artifact kind is a decades-long process of dealing with conflicts and of convergence. Convergence means that first, there is a component for each function, but in the course of time, components get multiple functions. For Simondon, natural objects like a tree have achieved a better fit between physical realization and functional requirements than artifacts, and in that respect are more mature. The constituency of artifacts is an important element in his analysis. Artifacts can evolve by evolving their components, or by converging their components, but also by a combination into higher-level artifacts (ensembles). Considering both the composition of the artifact and the way it is integrated into its technical environment comes close to Simon's [10] view that the artifact functions as an interface. For instance, an electric engine in a locomotive is a kind of interface between the power structure that drives the engine and the train that needs the engine to move. As such, the artifact evolves in interaction with (adapting to) the environment and its development, as well as to the evolution of its components. The interface character of technical artifacts, which for computer scientists and IS researchers sounds very familiar, was seldom worked out in philosophy as deeply as Simondon has done.

## 3.5. The constituency question

Although the scope of this paper is applied ontology, not philosophy, we need to say a bit more about the notion of ''constituency'' and the classical problem of form-matter. Houkes &amp; Meijers [43] provide a lucid account of the question. The statue and its constituting wood are two different things. Another way of saying that is to talk about the dual nature of artifacts: they are both physical objects and functional objects, and the two aspects cannot be reduced to each other. To do justice to this dual nature aspect, Houkes &amp; Meijers argue, an adequate ontology of artifacts must meet the criteria of underdetermination and realizability constraints. The former one says that the relationship between artifact and constituting object is many-to-many, thus ensuring that the two are really different. The latter says that the relationship is, though flexible, also rigid: not anything goes, there are constraints. Houkes &amp; Meijer then discuss two metaphysical approaches to see whether they can meet these criteria when applied to the dual nature problem. The first one, supervenience, stems from the philosophy of mind (mind/brain problem) and turns out to be not adequate. The second one is the constitution view of Baker [8]. This approach comes close. According to Baker, constitution is the glue that keeps the material world together. Not everything is one and the same. There are distinct primary kinds of objects, with their specific causal properties. Constitution is the relation between these different things which is dependent on circumstances. Constitution can be applied, for instance, to glue together the primary kinds of atoms, H 2 O molecules and rivers, as different entities, although all are some kind of water. Applied to artifacts, for Baker an object x is an artifact if and only if (1) it has one or more designers d whose intentions determine (to some extent) its proper function and on whose intentions the existence of x depends and (2) x is constituted by an appropriate aggregate, selected or arranged by d to realize x 's proper function ([43]:125). Although this view comes close to meeting the artifact ontology constraints, some questions remain, in particular about the design (does it include, or is it the same as, a use plan?) and about the term ''appropriate'', which does not say very much about the kind of realizability constraints.

Constituency and supervenience are not the only alternatives. Evnine [44] describes a hylomorphic theory of artifacts, actions and organisms that is comparable to Baker's constituency, but wants to define this relationship more specifically for different categories. Artifacts have emergent properties with respect to the material they are made from, but this emergence cannot be generalized to non-artifacts, such as rivers, he claims. His view is closer to Fine [45] who introduces the notion of qua object (Socrates qua teacher, or qua husband not identical to Socrates). The statue is the wood qua statue, or, in other words, the wood is the basis of the statue. The next step is then to characterize the relationship between qua object and basis. Fine makes a distinction between rigid embodiments and variable embodiments. The example of a rigid embodiment is that of a ham sandwich that has two slices of bread and a slice of ham - the basis -plus the relationship between them. Rigid embodiments cannot change without losing their identity. Variable embodiments, on the other hand, are defined by a principle F that determines, for any time t, a manifestation of the principle. The variable embodiment maintains its identity while over time it has different manifestations (being rigid embodiments). A problem with the qua objects might be that there is no limit on what counts as property, hence leading to a hyperinflation of objects. Moreover, according to Evnine [44], the principle cannot be just an abstract function, but must be ''rule-like''. In this line, [46] offers an ontological account of organizations as variable embodiments where the rules are roughly the statutes, which not only describe a governance structure but also the procedures by which the structure can evolve.

## 3.6. Conclusion

In the philosophical literature, the discussion of artifacts is dominated by the form/matter problem. Scholars have to navigate between the Scylla of materialism and the Charybdis of idealism. There are different views on artifact function: the intentionalist stance hinges on the designer intentions, while others relate it to the material capacities, the use context or the evolutionary forces in the artifact network. In our view, all of these must have a role in an artifact ontology.

Most scholars restrict artifacts to objects with a material base, but there are different opinions on whether these are the only entities with a hylomorphic structure. Some suggest to abolish the nature/culture distinction altogether. In the following, will restrict the artifact ontology to objects with a material base. Here it is essential to have an artifact notion, as a reduction of these objects to their material base would yield an incomplete account. Although for instance social structures, promises, beliefs or real numbers are, in some way, also manmade, they already have a specific ontological status, and an artifact view obscures more than that it clarifies.

## 4. Ontology of artifacts

In this section, we develop a general ontology of artifacts that builds on the philosophical work of Borgo [4] and others discussed above. Our aim is to complement and integrate their work with the Design Science Research perspective, and ground it in the foundational ontology UFO [2]. There are several ways in which ontologies can be specified, for instance in logic or in OWL. We use OntoUML as it is based on UFO and provides a graphical UML-compliant format that clearly shows the conceptual structure. We first give basic definitions and illustrate our artifact definition with some small examples. In Section 4.3, we give a preview of the artifact ontology, which is worked out bottom-up in 4.4-4.8. In 4.9, we define DSR artifacts and in 4.10, textual objects and symbolic artifacts.

Fig. 1. Basic concepts.

[FIGURE]

## 4.1. Basic definitions

For our basic definition of physical object, we follow the UFO definition of a substance individual [2]. A Physical object is an endurant that consists of matter (i.e., is ''tangible'' or concrete), possesses spatio-temporal properties, and can exist by itself. It does not existentially depend on other endurants, except possibly on some of its parts. UFO-C makes a further distinction between agentive and non-agentive substantial individuals. An Artificial object is a physical object made by human agents. A Natural object is a physical object that is not an artificial object. The categories artificial object/natural object do not exhaust the complete set of endurants. For instance, mathematical objects and social entities are endurants but not physical objects.

A Technical object is a non-agentive physical object (individual) that is intentionally created, usually for practical use (Fig. 1). A technical object, as any physical object, has capacities that are realized in its use. Some of these capacities are the result of the creation and not present in its source. The non-agentive restriction expresses that agency is not consistent with being a technical object.

An Artifact universal like ''the Diesel engine'' is a type that has a Design specification consisting of a (at least one) make plan , a (at least one) use plan and a capacity specification . When an artisan construes a technical object but there is no make plan, it is not an artifact instance. A particular physical object is said to conform to or implement the technical artifact universal if its composition is according to the make plan, it shows the specified capacities, and its purpose corresponds to the use plan. In that case, it is an artifact instance. The make plan expresses the composition of the artifact instance in terms of components and structure , and possibly the make process . The make plan ensures that (sooner or later) there is more than one instance. The use plan specifies under which use conditions the object can be used to achieve an effect. We talk about Technical Artifact universals when the objects implementing the artifact are technical objects ; there may be artifact universals that are non-technical.

Instrument is a role of an object in an event. The instrument is used in the event. This corresponds partially to the UFO definition of resource as 'an object participating in an action'. Some resources are consumed in the use (e.g. a medicine), while others can be used repeatedly. However, the instrument role essentially means that the participation of the object, under the right conditions, contributes to some effect, in cooperation with or on behalf of the agent. Note that instruments are not necessarily artificial objects: a shell can be used for drinking water, stars can be used to navigate at sea and live leeches can be used in medicine.

## 4.2. Examples

Examples of artificial objects are not only hammers, cars and software, but also a footprint in the sand, or production waste. However, the latter two are not technical objects, as they are not made for a purpose. Blood produced by the human body is not artificial, as it is not produced by the human as agent. The beaver dam, sometimes called a quasi-artifact, is not an artifact by a lack of design specification, and neither artificial. However, if it can be shown that beavers have intentions, the dam is a technical object. A pebble at the beach is a natural object. When you throw it to kill a bird, it is an instrument. When it is cleaned and moved to serve as a doorstep, and turns out to perform as intended, it becomes a technical object. We do not speak of an artifact in this case yet, but if there is a systematic (designed) process of collecting, selecting and preparing pebbles to function as doorsteps, and they are accepted as such by users, then there is a technical artifact universal ''pebble doorstop''.

The synthetic diamond is an artifact universal; its instances are technical objects and instances of the natural kind diamond. Seedless bananas [41] are not technical objects, but if we agree that there is a design specification for them (where the make plan takes the form of grafting), ''the seedless banana'' is a non-technical artifact universal. The focus of this paper is on technical artifacts. A software program like MS-Word is a technical artifact universal, implemented in millions of copies. A natural language, or a language object such as a promise, are social objects but not artifacts, nor artificial.

A company is not a technical object, as it is not non-agentive physical. It consists of human agents in the first place. Like the family, it is a social entity in the sense of UFO, and may be analyzed from a system perspective. It is true that technical artifacts, e.g. the ERP system, take a prominent role in business: they both constrain organizational behavior and enlarge its capabilities. Still, at the deep level, companies (or organizations in general) are driven by communicative action and social influence [47]. Instead of taking the organization as an artifact, it is more appropriate for DSR to take the organizational technology as artifact, and the organization as its use context.

Fig. 2. Technical object ontology, following Borgo [4].

[FIGURE]

## 4.3. Ontology preview

Before we introduce the artifact ontology bottom up, we briefly sketch the overall picture. From a design perspective, the starting point is the design conversation (4.9) between designer and user, where the role of the designer is to serve user needs, expressed as requirements for the design of an artifact. The designer can do the making himself, but in general, the designer role and maker role are to be distinguished, leading to a second conversation designer maker. The design conversations continue over time in many cycles, and artifacts evolve correspondingly. Corresponding to the two conversations, the artifact design (4.8) consists essentially of a use plan and a make plan and identifies the artifact universal . The make plan sets a goal for the making: a technical object that has the specified capacities in the make context (4.4). The use plan sets a goal for the using: the use effect in the use context (4.5). Technical objects have a life cycle (4.7) and are embedded in an artifact network (4.6). A DSR artifact (4.10) is an artifact universal that is relevant to some scientific domain and specified in a rigorous way. Finally, we devote a section (4.11) to textual artifacts.

In the following, we focus on technical artifacts, although we assume that the ontology mutatis mutandis (in particular, in the make plan) holds for non-technical artifacts as well.

## 4.4. Make context

According to Borgo's definition, an artifact A is 'a physical object which an agent (or group of agents) creates by two, possibly concurrent, intentional acts: the selection of a material entity (as the constituent of A) and the attribution to A of a technical quality or capacity'. Usually, the selection involves production, but the definition also allows natural objects to be selected without modification. We can compare Borgo's definition with the Delft definition of technological artifact [5] as 'a physical object created by the carrying out by an agent (or by agents) of a make plan for an object with a physical description'. The ''physical description'' stands for a description that the make plan should realize. In terms of Borgo, this is the attributed technical capacity. As a make plan is assumed in the Delft definition, this rules out the ad hoc instrument case. The make plan requirement corresponds with Borgo's intentional acts but it is more restrictive, because in general, intention need not be prospective. The choice that we make in our ontology is that we follow Borgo for technical objects in general, and the Delft definition for artifact instances.

In Fig. 2, the ''selecting'' event has either a material or technical source and a physical result. In the following, we will usually talk about source objects, but without excluding amounts of material like oil or ore - in UFO, any material non-agentive substance therefore it is stereotyped as a roleMixin. Following Borgo and Baker, the physical result is not identified with the technical object, but it constitutes the technical object. This relationship is stereotyped as a historical dependency (UFO: founded by an event). The capacity attributing is modeled, following Borgo, as a separate action on the result that creates the technical object with its capacities. Capacities are UFO dispositions stereotyped as ''quality'' (see also 4.5). The technical object can have inherent (inherited from the constituting physical object) and attributed capacities. It makes sense to require that it has at least one of each, in order to express the criteria of underdetermination and realizability (3.5). The technical object is defined as an object constituted by a physical object that has been attributed capacities according to the maker intention.

There are two typical make types: a molding or transformation type (material source raw iron turned into a nail) and a composition type (a workstation as composition of technical sources such as computer machine, software, a keyboard and screen; but a combination is also possible. In terms of UFO, the make event is an action, which means that there is an agent participant (agent being a UFO category) and that it manifests an intention.

The ontological distinction between result object and technical object builds on the work of Baker, combined with an intentionalist approach to functions, but alternatives are possible. Following the Delft definition of technological artifact and the criticism of Kassel [48], it is also possible to have only one object. We propose to achieve this by replacing the constitution relationship by a subtype relationship (between the role ''technical object'' and the role ''result''). Then the technical object is not a separate object anymore. We solve the ontological puzzle in the first view that when we have a hammer and think there is only one object, there would be two co-located objects. Moreover, role expresses that the technical object does not exist on its own but as participating in a relationship. Another consequence of this choice is that we do not need to distinguish between material and technical source anymore all sources are physical objects (Fig. 3).

Fig. 3. Technical object make ontology, second version.

[FIGURE]

Although it might be possible to merge the selecting and attributing actions into one ''make'', we think there are good reasons to keep two actions, but we prefer to characterize them as making vs. testing . Evaluation is intrinsic to any development process (cf. Schön's doing and seeing [49]), and is considered essential in design research (build and evaluate [1]), although different levels of evaluation must be distinguished; here we are talking about formative evaluation. The making can stop when the product has the specified capacities, as confirmed by a test. Whereas the attributing in Borgo has the flavor of a declarative, a baptism event in the spirit of Putnam, testing here means empirical validation (something perhaps not possible for natural kinds, but possible for artifacts according to Schwartz [50]). Testing refers to the presence of a capacity or the absence. Sometimes it is required that the technical object does not have some capacity, for instance, that it is inflammable.

The model accounts for the situation of unsuccessful production of technical objects. The technical object isa result, but not the other way round. The result also includes unplanned output or a waste by-product. If the maker tries to build an artifact instance (based on an artifact design, if the artifact type already exists; or on some vision, in the case of an invention), but does not succeed - the test fails - then he has produced an artificial object, but not a technical object. A technical object is malfunctioning [5,51] as A-artifact at time t if it has been made according to the make plan of A and the tested capacity meets the design specification at some point before t but not anymore at t . A technical object that simply does not meet the design specification of A is of course not an A-artifact at all.

## 4.5. Use context

According to common sense definitions, an artifact is created for a practical use, or to address a practical problem. This practical use is not accounted for in the make ontology. According to Wieringa [12], design science is about evaluating artifacts in context , such as a drug in the human body. Ontology researchers have different views on the relevance of the use context. It does not have a place in the definition of Borgo, while the Cambridge social ontology project [16,29] recognizes that for social artifacts like money the use conditions play an essential role. Faulkner [29]: 'the identity of technological objects is underdetermined by their physical characteristics, in addition to their material form there is an inherently social aspect to the identity'. Houkes [52] goes even further and gives use a primary role. Using an artifact can be characterized as executing a use plan for that artifact and ''designing primarily and necessarily involves constructing a use plan and communicating this plan to other agents'' [28:39]. Houkes (in [52]) even calls the making secondary: in many cases, the artifact design takes already existing artifacts, or artifacts where the production is rather trivial, and most of the work is use plan design.

Our conclusion is that both the make context and the use context are necessary ingredients of an artifact ontology, without considering one to be more important than the other. We do not claim that all technical objects have a use plan only those that conform to a technical artifact universal. In the case of an ad hoc creation of a technical object, there is, by definition, an intention, but not necessarily a use plan. An artistic painting is a good counter-example.

Fig. 4 describes the use ontology. Using an instrument is conceptualized as an event that is part of a usage (complex) event. Note that we also allow material objects to have an instrument role. The use condition specifies the necessary and sufficient conditions for the realization of the instrument capacities and is stereotyped as an UFO situation that satisfies a field . We do not further define the field (cf. 3.2) but model it as a proposition. It can specify the artifact network on which the technical object depends for its working. For instance, a Google map app assumes a network in place of telecom infrastructure and GPS satellites. Alternatively, it can specify essential forces, like gravity in the case of a pendulum, or the light of the sun in the case of a sundial. The force content can also be social, e.g. in the case of written text that assumes a literate community (this may be a reason to call the artifact a social artifact). To make the use successful and valuable, often more is needed than that the technical object ''works'', that is, the use condition is satisfied. We account for that in the usage effect (see below).

Fig. 4. Use ontology.

[FIGURE]

We conceptualize the capacities as a disposition . In UFO [53], a disposition d of an object o is defined as follows: 'On the occurrence of an event e of type TE d involving o in a situation satisfying certain standard state conditions, an event of type RE d , involving o as a participant, and an accompanying state change, are triggered as a manifestation of d' . In the use context we are modeling, e is the using event which is a manifestation of capacities. The technical object (or more generally, instrument) o participates in the use event. The standard state conditions correspond to the use condition.

The use effect of the using event (a situation) can be specified more precisely if we consider a subset of technical artifacts that transform some input to some output for instance, a coffee machine, a 3D printer, but also an application that transforms input data into output data. Then the use effect corresponds to the postcondition. In other cases, like the use of an umbrella to keep dry, the use effect is an invariant. Note that there is a causal relationship between capacities and use effect. It is not easy to describe (invisible) capacities without referring to their manifestation in use. So there is continuity between formative testing capacities in the make context and evaluating the use effect in the use context, where the latter corresponds to summative evaluation.

The use effect is a realization of the capacities of the artifact, but note that the capacities are not necessarily limited to the designed capacities. The artifact also inherits capacities from its material composition, and it may show capacities that the designer did not intend. Aspirin can turn out have a blood thinning effect, or a printer can be used as doorstop, while remaining a printer. A designed doorstop would have a more efficient composition.

Events in UFO can be atomic and complex, so this also applies to using events. Usage is an aggregation level that corresponds to practices, which themselves may also have different aggregation levels. Practice (modeled as an UFO proposition, i.e. an abstract set of situations) is taken here in the sociological sense of Bourdieu, Giddens and Schatzky [54], and consists of the both explicit and implicit rules, expectations and the shared understanding of social activities. Although technical objects differ in genericity, most assume one or more specific practices in which they get a meaningful use. These practices evolve over time, and changes in the practice can have an impact on the artifact use and possibly, indirectly, by some form of feedback to the designers, on the design of the artifact [55]. This feedback cycle is more than evaluating the artifact in the use context to find out whether it works as intended. It may give rise to new user needs, and required adaptations of the design - a new cycle in the designer - user conversation. Practically, it can be argued that the designer should not only think in advance of the use conditions, but also of the practices (usage conditions), how they are being transformed when a new artifact is introduced, and how feedback is processed.

The distinction between use effect and usage effect has implications for the evaluation process. It is one thing that a car can reach a certain speed, or drive a certain distance given a certain amount of gas. Whether the user can get to her work safely and timely also depends on the road infrastructure, traffic regulations and traffic jams. Another example is an IS application whose (use effect) performance is measured by the number of transactions per second and whose usage effect is measured by the increase of productivity or employee satisfaction. The usage effect of the artifact is dependent on the use practice and cannot be attributed to the artifact alone.

Fig. 5. Technical object lifecycle.

[FIGURE]

According to the tradition, the goal of using technical objects with instrument role is to extend the human capacities. However, technology use has an effect on all participating objects. The effect can be constructive or destructive, or both. Still, we can say that the ethical standard is to protect capacities and to realize them. An information system extends human data processing capacities, and realizes capacities of the hardware, while a coffee machine realizes the potential of coffee powder. Protective artifacts are e.g. dikes, speed limiters, anti-virus software and clothes. A full description of the usage effect should include the effect on (the capacities of) all participants.

## 4.6. Artifact network

Many technical objects do not serve a direct practical goal for end users, but are intended to be components of a larger technical object. The use conditions of the component need to be taken into account in the make and use context of the whole, and are part of the interface description of the component. The production process, for which the technical object is a source, is a use practice that is less prominent in technical/design research papers and textbooks than the individual end user/consumer context. It is true that the end user context for object X of which object Y is a component, is indirectly also relevant for Y (and vice versa). In general, we must acknowledge that the use context is multi-tier. Still, DSR could give more attention to the production process as use context.

In some sense, the artifact/technical object is an interface [10] that builds a bridge between the make context and the use context. Concretely, the interface is formed by the capacities. They are relatively stable elements of the artifact over time, 2 when both make plan and use plan evolve [55].

An artifact network is a network of imbricating artifacts. The imbrication can be of several kinds ( ∼ stands for overlap): A component of B; A and B both components of C; use plan of A ∼ make plan of B; A in use condition of B; usage of A ∼ usage of B; and many more. For instance, we can start with a mathematical Python library used in developing a Python program. The library is part of the make plan of the program, while at the same time the program should comply with the use plan of the library. The software program can be part of an IS application that is used in a work system the use plan of the program refers to the work practice, including resources and social norms. The goal of the work system may be to build a robot, which again is used in another make context. The use condition of the IS application may be that the running device is on the Internet, which builds on a telecom infrastructure. The implication for artifact design is that it always involves integrating a new artifact into the existing network, and this integration is an ongoing process as the network evolves continuously. Part of the meaning of artifact function is its function in a system [35,56].

## 4.7. Technical object life cycle

Technical objects are not only produced at some point in time, after which they are finished, but go through a life cycle. In the last decades there has been an increase in the attention to the product life cycle from a sustainability point of view. In traditional artifact ontologies, this life cycle aspect has mostly been kept out of the scope. Although when going into details object life cycles are product-specific, we can distinguish some general phases. According to Otte et al. [57], the three main phases of the product life cycle are BOL, MOL, and EOL. BOL (beginning) includes planning, design, and manufacturing. During this phase, the product design is generated and subsequently physically realized; the product remains within the boundaries of the enterprise. In our model, we distinguish Design from Production/Manufacturing. Note that viewing the technical object as evolving over its lifetime means that it already exists as planned before being produced. MOL (middle-Employment), according to [57], includes distribution, use, and support (for example repair and maintenance). The product is typically in the hands of the final customer. Note that MOL is wider than use. For instance, it may include real-time preventive services, like car control services. We distinguish three generic subphases: distribution, usage and maintenance. EOL (end) occurs where products are retired - actually re-collected in the company's hands (reverse logistic) - in order to be disposed, in some way or another. As Technical object is a roleMixin, the phases are stereotyped as PhaseMixins in Fig. 5.

2 Many artifacts are named according to their function, e.g. bedspread and calculator. However, there are counterexamples, like zebra crossing, where the name is clearly not based on function but on the composition [36].

Fig. 6. Design ontology.

[FIGURE]

## 4.8. Artifact design

According to Wieringa [12], design is a decision and the design specification is a documentation of that decision. In product engineering, a design specification typically describes the decomposition of the product, or the inner design while in software engineering, a specification describes the external behavior of the software. In our model, the design specification includes both an inner design and outer design. The capacity attribution is the interface between the inner design context and the outer design context. On the one hand, it is the outcome of the make event (Fig. 3), and on the other hand, it is realized in the use event, resulting in a use effect (Fig. 4). The use plan describes a process. The use plan is not decomposed here but typically includes the use condition and the way of working ( method ). The component list, how they are combined ( structure ) and the way of working ( method ) are the key components of the make plan.

The core of the design (Fig. 6) consists of two claims: the make plan claim is that when someone executes the make plan, the result is an object whose capacities satisfy the make goal. The use plan claim is that when someone executes the use plan, the use effect satisfies the use goal. Both claims are default or pragmatic rules: they are open to refinement, as there are typically many unknowns about why and when it works. It is possible that the make plan is deficient or the technical object is not produced correctly, so that the actual capacity differs from the make goal: the technical object does not conform to the artifact universal. The make claim is typically assessed in the product testing, while the use claim is assessed in the use test.

Note that the artifact universal is on type level, also the make and use plan describe classes of situations. The Eiffel Tower made for one specific situation is a technical object but not an artifact universal.

Validation of the artifact universal in context can consider the usage effect. The usage effect is not part of the use plan, but represents knowledge about the artifact universal. This knowledge can also contain ''anti-patterns'', i.e., a specification of the effect in situations that deviate from the use conditions.

Use plan and make plan are plan descriptions (UFO-C [2]) that make up the artifact design identifying an artifact universal, e.g. the Diesel engine or the neural network, stereotyped as OntoUML type . The artifact universal (the meta-artifact in [16,58]) evolves over time when the design is adapted (1-1 relationship). In terms of Enterprise Ontology, the artifact universal corresponds to the ''prescription of form'' called the intension of the type [47]. The instantiation (OntoUML stereotype) relationship between type and individual is called ''conforms''. It is a derived relationship: an artifact (instance) conforms to an artifact universal x iff it is a technical object made according to one of the make plans of the artifact design y identifying x and its capacities satisfy the make plan goal of y . The use plans of y describe how to use the object to achieve the use goal.

It is typical for artifact universals that their extension is not homogeneous they exist in many versions and variants. Variants proper specialize the artifact universal. Artifacts can also be grouped (not included in the model). In principle, an artifact genus is distinguished from its siblings by its capacity specification and possibly use plan. Examples of genera are car, engine, sorting algorithm. The artifact kinds under a genus are typically differentiated by their make plan. For instance, electric car, Diesel engine, quicksort algorithm, where a variant of the quicksort algorithm is the non-recursive version. We consider ''vehicle'' to be an abstract category unifying different artifact genera on the basis of a shared transport capacity.

## 4.9. Design conversation

Design science typically involves making technical objects, but essentially, it is about designing. We want to account for both its symbolic character (it uses representations) and its communicative aspect. To start with the latter, we view designing as embedded in a conversation (Fig. 7) between designer and user(s), as well as maker(s). The user may start to be imaginary in the design lab context, but given that artifacts are for practical use, there is always a user assumed. A borderline case is when the designer is his own user. We posit that for an artifact universal the user role should include other agents; so an object that is made for personal use only is a technical object but not an artifact. The structure of the conversation can differ widely, but ontologically, at least some elements are always there: the requirements, design objects, a make plan and a use plan. In a rational conversation, the moves are warranted by design rationales. Often a requirement is put on artifacts that they are 'recognized within some community as having been created to serve in achieving a particular end' [59]. We prefer not to talk about recognition, but about acceptance by the user role from which social recognition is a consequence.

Fig. 7. Design conversation ontology.

[FIGURE]

Some design approaches make the conversational character of the design quite concrete. Semiotic engineering [60] defines HCI as 'a meta-communication process through which designers are telling users their design vision, and by so doing enabling users to learn, explore and apply this vision to a wide range of predicted and unpredicted situations'. This meta-communication takes place in the design phase, but also during the use phase, in the form of help functions and the design of the interface in general. Another recent paper [61] views the requirement processing as an argumentation process in which decisions to adopt, reject or adapt a requirement are backed up by an argument.

Whereas the design conversation between designer and user is easy to recognize, there is also a conversation with the maker. Only in the traditional artisan model, designer and maker coincide [62]. A difference is that the user has a customer role with respect to the designer, whereas the designer has a customer role to the maker. However, the asymmetry in the relationships should not be overemphasized communicative action is a cooperative effort. For instance, it is generally accepted in Software Engineering that users cannot formulate requirements themselves. We assume that the basic structure of the conversation is the transaction in the sense of Language/Action or Enterprise Ontology [47,63] that consists of an actagenic phase (request/commitment) and a factagenic phase (assertion/acceptance). The transaction cycle can be repeated multiple times, and can be temporarily paused by a discussion or moved back by a cancellation of earlier moves.

Communicative acts bring about something in our case, design objects . Design objects be they graphical or textual play an important role during the design [64], e.g. a blueprint or a UML class diagram. They express some part of the design and are in (brought into) the shared model space of the participants. The design objects describe the artifact universal from Fig. 6.

## 4.10. Design science research artifact

A (domain) Design Science Research (DSR) artifact is an artifact universal with a well-described design specification (formal rigor) whose instances are directly or indirectly used in a (domain) practice for practical purposes and also used in a research practice (the scientific community) for the purpose of building up knowledge on that domain. Why a universal? As science aims at abstract knowledge, not knowledge of the particular, the DSR artifact should generalize over multiple use contexts. Still, not every artifact universal is a DSR artifact, because not all design is design research [65]. DSR artifacts must have at least a certain level of rigor and generalizability (in our ontology: a well-specified make and use plan), as well as practical and scientific relevance , which implies, respectively, that there is a measurable usage effect and that it is bound to a scientific domain, such as Information Systems. Moreover, it must have instantiations so that evaluation knowledge can be acquired. Generalizability does not mean the more abstract the better. In many cases, it means a focus on reusable components, rather than integrated systems.

When rigor is required for the design, the specification must be explicit, usually consisting of several design objects. Preferably, the design objects are specified in formal language, so conforming to a model type, so conforming to a model artifact.

A DSR artifact should not be equated with a DSR project outcome. We have defined artifacts as brought about by a design conversation that spans a long lifetime. Individual research projects typically address only one phase or aspect. We recognize the following types (cf. [66,67]):

## A. Design of a new DSR artifact (make plan, use plan), preferably with a proof of concept instantiation

Fig. 8. Text as a technical object in a language community.

[FIGURE]

- B. Improvement of the make plan (more efficient, effective, robust, sustainable etc.), while keeping the same use plan. The improvement may be a completely new make plan to realize the same function
- C. Improvement of the use plan . This may be by finding a completely new use context (and use plan), or strengthening or loosening the use conditions of an existing plan.
- D. Establishing or reinforcing the relevance of the artifact by demonstrating how the artifact, in a practical context (use practice), solves problems or contributes to organizational goals. This type of research overlaps with empirical research in business disciplines.
- E. Development of scientific models (theory) of the artifact, to improve our understanding of its working.

The assumption that motivates DSR is that our knowledge of artifacts is never complete . The make plan and use plan are not more than default rules. In 5.4 we have more to say about scientific models.

## 4.11. Text objects

A text object such as the blue book on my desk is a technical object where the capacity (the written content) is manifested in the use (the reading). Text is to be understood in a wide sense, i.e. a variety of information encoding modes. Any text object has a physical basis (e.g. paper, disk block), a structure (of signs), a capacity (meaning) and an intended use. A software program instance is to be read by a processor, and the use effect is a change in the internal memory of the computer. In the Saussurean tradition of human language, a sign is relating signifier to signified. The signifier is the text object, and the signified is the use effect, that is, the evoked concept in the mind of the reader as the manifestation of the signifier's capacity.

We need to say a bit more about the relationship between text and language, although our description will be far from complete. Natural language is not a technical object, but text is. More in general, we can talk about writing technology that started with clay tablets and papyrus, made a big jump with the invention of the alphabet and nowadays is evolving into digital technology. Text has commonalities with others technical objects [68]: in both cases, the intention must be grasped by the user. The use can be, for instance, to run away, in the case of a danger sign. The reading of alphabetic signs for changing the mental state of the listeners can be seen in the same line (Fig. 8). According to the pragmatist slogan, meaning is use. The effectiveness of the text depends (use condition) on the shared language and shared education in reading/writing. For instance, the use of the signifier DOG evokes the concept of dog shared by the English language community.

Whereas all artifacts have a use function, text objects also have a representational function [68]. The concept dog is about a certain kind of animals [34]. For natural language text objects, this representational function has its basis in the language community. In our view, the capacity of the sign is just to evoke the concept. The representational function is a usage effect of the sign (4.5). Apart from natural language texts and iconic objects like a map, there are texts in a formal language for a specific domain. In this case, the representational function cannot piggyback on a language community, and needs to be specified, explicitly in the case of a DSR artifact. Examples are software programs (5.1) and financial books. A DSR description of a formal language, such as double entry bookkeeping, has to specify the relationship between the language and the represented domain (economic exchanges).

Text objects can also be called symbolic objects. If the text object is conforming to an artifact universal, then the latter is a symbolic artifact. Text objects can be copied easily, but the existence of multiple physical copies is not a sufficient criterion for positing a symbolic artifact universal. There must be an artifact design (4.8) that is defined in terms of a class of situations, not a specific one like in the case of John's email yesterday.

## 5. An overview of IT/IS artifacts

Whereas some proposals have identified a shortlist of IT/IS artifacts and others have refrained from any characterization, our proposal is to identify a few primary artifacts and a generative mechanism by which secondary artifacts can be derived. It is possible, for instance, to define artifacts to which a specific design object must conform (e.g. the UML object model); or to design a tool to support the design conversation.

March &amp; Smith [28] mention constructs, models, methods and instantiations as types of IS design research artifacts, where ''method'' includes algorithms. Taking these as a reference point, we work out primary and secondary artifacts, and discuss the role of instantiations and models.

Fig. 10. IT application.

[FIGURE]

## 5.1. Primary artifacts algorithms, programs and IS applications

According to Offerman et al. [29], an algorithm, like a method, describes a sequence of activities that are executed by a computer. They define it as 'an executable description of a system behavior'. Examples given are sorting algorithm, data mining algorithm, and protocol. From the ontological perspective, the sorting algorithm, in one of its variants, e.g. quicksort (Fig. 9), is an artifact universal that is instantiated in all its executable representations (text objects conforming to the algorithm artifact universal). 3

In the pre-computer age, these executable representations had to be executed (on paper) by humans. The attributed capacity of the executable representation (that the elements in the input list get ordered) is manifested in the execution and realized in the use effect on this list. With analog computers, the executable representation is a make plan for a machine. The capacity of the resulting machine is that it can sort a list, or calculate differentials.

In the digital computer age, the algorithm's representation, in the form of an executable digital file, is executed by (used by) a digital machine. When the program is executed under the right use conditions, a new memory state is created [31].

The code (text object) has to be made first. This is based on the design specification, more precisely the make plan. What is potentially confusing is that when the design specification is sufficiently detailed, in a programming language, the code seems to be just a copy of this specification. This is of course an abstraction. Assume that the specification is programming code. In most cases, a compiler is used to translate the code into an executable. In many cases, the specification is less detailed than program code and we need a programmer to do the building. Only in the case that the design specification is written in a programming language and this text object is executed by an interpreter directly, the specification and executable coincide. This possibility is specific for symbolic artifacts.

We regard an algorithm as an artifact universal (cf. [70]) and a software program ( IT application -Fig. 10) as an aggregation of algorithms (so a derived artifact universal). Apart from the difference in use plan (and related formal rigor required in the make plan), the structure of a software program is usually more complex than a sequence of computational steps. Nowadays, its composition is usually described in terms of objects or services. Object-orientation is a kind of design objects.

To make the bridge to an external context, we need I/O devices that are able to create text objects outside the machine. How the I/O device, object code and processor interact exactly is not relevant for our analysis, but one way of viewing it is that the three are assembled into a new DSR artifact genus, the IS application. The IS application is what is used by the human agent according to its use plan (the prescribed user interaction) to generate and transform data objects in an organizational context (Fig. 11). This typically takes place within a work system and more broadly (usage) a business process practice.

When an IS application is assembled together with a machine or robot into a cyberphysical system , yet another artifact genus arises. Perhaps in the near future, cyberphysical systems become more prominent than current IS applications in the IS field, and we have to adapt our terminology.

3 For an extensive introduction into philosophical aspects of computing, see [69].

Fig. 11. IS application.

[FIGURE]

## 5.2. Secondary artifacts formal languages, constructs and methods

Secondary artifacts support the design of primary artifacts, for instance as model of the artifact. Supporting software artifacts are formal language artifacts, like programming languages. A programming language provides the constructs (basic components) from which the source code can be assembled according to certain rules (the use plan of the construct).

Objects in OO languages are intermediate level semi-components. Offerman et al. [29] also mention the pattern as artifact. The pattern has multiple levels. It often represents design knowledge about some artifact (and so not an artifact itself), but in Programming it can also be a semi-component akin to a construct.

In principle, methods executed by humans are symbolic artifacts like algorithms. We can ask for their composition (cf. method engineering), and their use effect. Note, however, that many methods are in fact make plans or use plans of some other artifact, so they should be studied as such in the first place. A data modeling method is a make plan for a data model.

## 5.3. Instantiations

According to [28] and the majority of the DSR literature since, instantiations, or implementations, are possible DSR artifacts. In our ontology, DSR artifacts are artifact universals, so this excludes instantiations. An implementation is a technical object. It may conform to an artifact universal and the implementation - as a validating prototype but also when in use - can accumulate knowledge about the DSR artifact, in particular its make plan and use plan.

What about IS DSR that implements innovative software in some business context? An example is using Process Mining in the auditing domain. For this question, the distinction between IT application and IS application is important. ''The process mining algorithm'' is an IT artifact universal, and the Alpha algorithm is one of its variants. When applying it in the auditing domain, not much new is learned about the algorithm. However, at that moment the researcher is developing an IS application, the goal is not about producing some data structure in the computer memory, but instead about producing useful information for the auditor, on the basis of the enterprise data. The IS application is a DSR artifact if it is specified on a generic level and complies with the DSR artifact definition of 4.10. A specific implementation can be instrumental in developing this DSR artifact, evaluate it or contribute to its evolution.

## 5.4. Models

In traditional system sciences, models are made of social, material, or socio-material situations (cf. 2.3). Examples are models of the economic market, of a pandemic, or of (part of) a business organization. The model can be analyzed mathematically or by simulation [10]. Based on the analysis, the manager can make decisions that influence the system, for instance, by introducing an IT system. In this case, we call the models analysis/design models. Whether the intervention will have the foreseen effect is not guaranteed: what is built is not the system as a whole, but certain elements of it.

In many situations, such as a meteorological system, there is no design specification, but we can have a model for analysis and prediction purposes. A digitalized model, for instance for simulation, is of course an IS application.

Let us consider the example of an Entity Relationship diagram. It is a text object with a dual nature. On the one hand, it can be used as an analysis model of a non-technical system, for instance, a university with students, enrollments; etc. In most cases, it is an analysis/design model, for instance, to represent the domain and build an educational IS. On the other hand, it specifies the structure of a database system, a technical artifact. This design takes place in the conversation between system designer and user (that is why the graphical representation is useful) and the ER model is the make plan of the IT application (database). ''The ER model'' as introduced by Chen is a DSR artifact; more specifically, it is a secondary, formal language artifact. The use plan of the ER model imbricates with the make plan of the database, while the use plan of the IS application (the database and what comes to it) imbricates with the analysis/design model of the IS.

Design models are secondary artifacts (languages), but there is more. According to Boon and Knuuttila ([71]:693), 'the models developed in the engineering sciences should be distinguished from the models produced in engineering [in technological practice]. Whereas the latter usually represent the design of a device or its mechanical workings, models in the engineering sciences aim for scientific understanding of the behavior of different devices or the properties of diverse materials' (cf. [72,73]).

The intended use of the model for scientific understanding resonates with the design science research perspective, although the distinction between practical and scientific can be diffuse. It is fair to say that the scientific rigor of the current DSR scientific models is often lower than in the exact sciences with their long mathematical tradition. However, this should not invalidate the DSR ambition.

Summarizing, we have to distinguish different kinds of models with different relationships to artifacts:

- Analysis models of (socio-technical or other) systems . Some of these are IS artifacts. Examples are domain models that aim to analyze the behavior of an enterprise, for instance, system-dynamics simulations. A model for enterprise X instantiates ''the system-dynamics'' artifact.
- Analysis models used for artifact design . Examples are BPMN business process models (part of the use plan of the IS application artifact, e.g. a WFMS), an environment model that intelligent agents use for internal reasoning, or the ER model as domain model.
- Design models of technical artifacts. For instance, ER model as data model. The model is a make plan for the technical artifact database. It also instantiates ''the ER model'' artifact.
- Scientific models of DSR artifacts. Example is the universal Turing machine as a scientific model for (DSR artifact) computers; Codd's relational database model grounded in set theory; the Petri Net model as far as it is used to analyze process languages. A scientific model is typically specified in mathematical terms; if so, it should be treated as mathematical entity, not technical artifact. Scientific models are of course not confined to DSR artifacts, but used in many scientific disciplines.

## 5.4.1. Summary

Our claim is that software program (IT application) and IS application are the primary domain artifact kinds in Computer Science and Information Systems, respectively. The specification of these artifact kinds can make use of models, methods and formal languages/constructs. Instantiated systems are not DSR artifacts in our ontology, but evaluation studies of these technical objects (or systems) contribute to the design knowledge accumulated in the artifact to which the individual conforms. From a DSR perspective, scientific models of the domain artifacts and the related systems are mathematical entities that support the understanding of some aspect of the domain artifact. We claim that always some element of a design can be isolated that gives rise to new artifact types, so there is no exhaustive list, but for secondary artifacts, the categories of formal language and construct (focus on representation function) and method (focus on use function) are clearly essential. Our ontological analysis confirms the importance of most artifact types mentioned by March &amp; Smith, but, to the best of our knowledge, is the first to provide a systematic account.

## 5.5. Practical implications

Based on our ontological analysis, we can give some practical implications for the designer and design researcher in the form of guidelines.

- Distinguish technical objects from non-technical objects.
- Include in the artifact design a make plan that specifies at least the composition
- Focus not on building an artifact, but on designing an artifact universal (where designing includes the evolution of the design). Evaluate the artifact universal on the basis of its built instances in their use context to accumulate design knowledge.
- Include in the artifact design one or more use plans that specify use conditions and intended effect; relate to a use practice and study usage effects.
- Position the designed artifact in the artifact network (aggregation dimension) and in the artifact classification (identify type and distinguish it from siblings)
- Perform the design in conversation with actual or potential users. Test required capacities and be prepared to identify more when the use plan evolves.
- (for the IS researcher) Distinguish between IT artifact and IS artifact and focus on the latter
- (for the design researcher) Aim at developing scientific models of domain artifacts
- (for the design researcher) Follow one of the described DSR research types.

## 6. Conclusion

Artifacts are the object of DSR, but their ontological status is often taken for granted. This has led to discussions and confusion about the artifact status of information systems. In this paper, we have proposed some important distinctions, in particular the distinction between a technical object and artifact and the distinction between technical artifacts and non-technical artifacts. We claim that the DSR artifact is an artifact universal, or, in traditional terms, an artifact kind. Whereas the literature often isolates either the maker intention or the artifact use, our ontology keeps the two in balance. In the ontological literature on artifacts, the designing is often not distinguished from the making. Design specifications are recognized as important, but not as defining , like in our ontology. Furthermore, we have founded symbolic artifacts like software on writing technology.

Another new element in our ontology is to let the design specification inhere in a conversation between designers and users (and makers), a conversation that has several phases, in fact, is an ongoing conversation as long as the artifact kind persists. The conversational character of design is one motivation for the use of design cycles in DSR.

What we also emphasize is the imbrication structure of the artifact network. Too often design research is narrowed down to building/evaluating an isolated technical artifact in some delineated project. This was perhaps sufficient in the past, but nowadays we need a more holistic view, both in time (artifact evolution) and in space (technological network).

Although we do not position this paper in the philosophy domain, we can say something about the intentionalism discussion (Section 3). By giving design a decisive role in our definition of artifact, we acknowledge the role of designer intentions and we have added the maker and user as agents. However, we deviate from the intentionalist approach by (1) grounding design intentions in the designer-user-maker conversation, rather than in a mental world; (2) not talking about attributing capacities, but about testing them; the make plan is developed empirically and an explanation of the artifact function needs no reference to intention [74]; and (3) recognizing the system-function of the artifact in the artifact network.

In Section 1, we have formulated ten competency questions that have been given an answer in Sections 4 and 5. The general technical artifact ontology has been specified in a conversation with the literature, in particular Borgo [4], and has been applied in an ontological analysis of IS artifacts. We have formulated some practical consequences for DSR research types and for DSR methodology.

There are many further directions for research, for instance, further analysis of non-technical artifacts. Perhaps (some) written laws and contracts are symbolic artifacts [75]. We did not go into specifics of AI software. We have defined the artifact design as make plan and use plan, but more plans may be relevant. For example, a maintenance plan, or more general, a plan for each phase of the technical object lifecycle. As far as DSR is concerned, it is interesting to look at the impact of this artifact ontology on design methodologies. The ontology does not specify design process steps, but it provides a framework and suggests completeness criteria for the outcome of the design process.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

Hans Weigand: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft. Paul Johannesson: Conceptualization, Writing reviewing, Validation. Birger Andersson: Conceptualization, Writing - reviewing.

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## References

- [1] [A. Hevner, S. March, J. Park, S. Ram, Design science in information systems research', MIS Q. 28 (1) (2004) 75-105.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb1)
- [2] G. Guizzardi, R. de Almeida Falbo, R.S. Guizzardi, Grounding software domain ontologies in the unified foundational ontology (UFO): The case of the ODE software process ontology, in: Proc. CIbSE, 2008, pp. 127-140.
- [3] [V. Carvalho, J. Almeida, C. Fonsceca, G. Guizzardi, Extending the Foundations of Ontology-Based Conceptual Modeling with a Multi-Level Theory. ER 2015, in: LNCS, vol. 9381, Springer, 2015, pp. 119-133.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb3)
- [4] [S. Borgo, L. Vieu, Artifacts in formal ontology, Philos. Technol. Eng. Sci. (2009) 273-307.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb4)
- [5] S. Borgo, M. Franssen, P. Garbacz, Y. Kitamura, R. Mizoguchi, P.E. Vermaas, Technical artifacts: An integrated perspective, Appl. Ontol. 9 (3-4) (2014) 217-235.
- [6] [R. de Almeida Falbo, SABiO: Systematic approach for building ontologies, in: ONTO. COM/ODISE@ FOIS, CEUR Proceedings, Vol. 1301, 2014.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb6)
- [7] [H. Weigand, P. Johannesson, B. Andersson, An Ontology of IS Design Science Research Artefacts, Vol. 2020, RCIS, 2020, pp. 129-144.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb7)
- [8] [L.R. Baker, The ontology of artifacts, Philos. Exp. 7 (2) (2004) 99-111.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb8)
- [9] [P. Johannesson, E. Perjons, An Introduction to Design Science, Springer, 2014.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb9)
- [10] [H. Simon, The Sciences of the Artificial, third ed., MIT Press, 1996.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb10)
- [11] [S. Gregor, A. Hevner, Positioning and presenting design science research for maximum impact, MIS Q. 37 (2) (2013) 337-356.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb11)
- [12] [R. Wieringa, Design Science Methodology, Springer, 2013.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb12)
- [13] S. Purao, Design Research in the Technology of Information Systems: Truth or Dare, GSU Dept of CIS Working Paper, Georgia State University, Atlanta, 2002.
- [14] [R. Winter, Design Science Research in Europe, Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 17 (2008) 470-474.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb14)
- [15] [D. Jones, S. Gregor, The anatomy of a design theory, J. AIS (8) (2007) 19.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb15)
- [16] [G. Goldkuhl, M. Lind, A multi-grounded design research process, in: Proc. DESRIST 2010, Springer, 2010, pp. 45-60.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb16)
- [17] [A. Drechsler, A. Hevner, Utilizing, producing, and contributing design knowledge in DSR projects, in: Proc. DESRIST 2018, Springer, 2018, pp. 82-97.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb17)
- [18] [G. Simondon, On the Mode of Existence of Technical Objects, Univocal Publishing, Minneapolis, 1958/2016.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb18)
- [19] [M. Silver, L. Markus, Conceptualizing the SocioTechnical (ST) artifact, Syst. Signs Actions 7 (1) (2013) 82-89.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb19)
- [20] [S. Alter, The concept of 'IT artifact' has outlived its usefulness and should be retired now, Inf. Syst. J. 25 (1) (2015).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb20)
- [21] [H. Weigand, Value Expression in Design Science Research, Vol. 2019, RCIS, 2019, pp. 1-11.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb21)
- [22] [P. Vermaas, P. Kroes, I. Poel van de, M. Franssen, W. Houkes, A philosophy of technology: from technical artifacts to sociotechnical systems, in: Synthesis lectures on engineers, technology and society, vol. 6, Morgan &amp; Claypool Publishers, San Rafael, 2011, (1).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb22)
- [23] A. Lee, M. Thomas, R. Baskerville, Going back to the basics in design science: from the information technology artifact to the information system artifact, Inf. Syst. 25 (2014) 5-21.
- [24] F. Grabowski, D. Strzalka, Simple, complicated and complex systems - the brief introduction, in: 2008 Conference on Human System Interactions, 2008, pp. 570-573.
- [25] K. Pandza, R. Thorpe, Management as design, but what kind of design? An appraisal of the design science analogy for management, Br. J. Manage (21) (2010) 171-186.
- [26] J. van Aken, Management research as design science: Articulating the research products of mode 2 Knowledge Production in Management, Br. J. Manage. 16 (2005) 19-36.
- [27] [L. Kimbell, Rethinking design thinking: Part I, Des. Cult. 3 (3) (2011) 285-306.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb27)

- [28] [S. March, G. Smith, Design and natural science research on information technology, Decis. Support Syst. 15 (1995) 251-266.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb28)
- [29] [P. Offermann, S. Blom, M. Schönherr, U. Bub, Artifact types in information system design science - a literature review, in: R. Winter, et al. (Eds.), Global Perspectives on Design Science Research, Springer, 2010, pp. 77-92.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb29)
- [30] [J. Iivari, A paradigmatic analysis of information systems as a design science, Scand. J. Inf. Syst. 19 (2007) 39-64.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb30)
- [31] X. Wang, N. Guarino, G. Guizzardi, J. Mylopoulos, Towards an ontology of software: a requirements engineering perspective, in: Proc. FOIS 2014, IOS Press, 2014, pp. 317-329.
- [32] [L.J. Osterweil, What is software?, Autom. Softw. Eng. 15 (3-4) (2008) 261-273.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb32)
- [33] W. Ceusters, An information artifact ontology perspective on data collections and associated representational artifacts, Stud. Health Technol. Inform. (180) (2012) 68-72.
- [34] W. Ceusters, B. Smith, Aboutness: Towards foundations for the information artifact ontology, in: Proc. 6th Int. Conf on Biomedical Ontology. CEUR 1515, 2015, pp. 1-5.
- [35] B. Preston, Artifact, the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2020, https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2020/entries/artifact/,
- [36] [B. Preston, A Philosophy of Material Culture: Action, Function, and Mind, Routledge, New York, 2013.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb36)
- [37] [J.R. Searle, S. Willis, Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind, Cambridge University Press, 1983.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb37)
- [38] [A.L. Thomasson, Artifacts in metaphysics, in: A.W.M. Meijers (Ed.), Philosophy of Technology and Engineering Sciences, Elsevier, 2009, pp. 191-212.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb38)
- [39] [P. Kroes, A. Meijers, The dual nature of technical artifacts, Stud. Hist. Philos. Sci. 37 (1) (2006) 1-4.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb39)
- [40] [C. Lawson, An ontology of technology: Artifacts, Relat. Funct. Tech. 12 (1) (2008) 48-64.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb40)
- [41] [D. Sperber, Seedless grapes: Nature and culture, in: E. Margolis, S. Laurence (Eds.), Creations of the Mind: Theories of Artifacts and their Representation, Oxford University Press, 2007, pp. 124-137.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb41)
- [42] [M.J. de Vries, Gilbert simondon and the dual nature of technical artifacts, Tech. Res. Philos. Technol. 12 (1) (2008) 23-35.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb42)
- [43] [W. Houkes, A. Meijers, The ontology of artifacts: the hard problem, Stud. Hist. Philos. Sci. A 37 (1) (2006) 118-131.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb43)
- [44] [S. Evnine, Making Object and Events: A Hylomorphic Theory of Artifacts, Actions, and Organisms, Oxford University Press, 2016.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb44)
- [45] [K. Fine, Things and their parts, Midwest Stud. Philos. 23 (1) (1999) 97-105.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb45)
- [46] D. Porello, R. Ferrario, C. Masolo, Organisations and variable embodiments, in: S. Borgo, et al. (Eds.), Formal Ontology in Information Systems - FOIS 2018, 2018, pp. 127-140, Available on https://philarchive.org/archive/POROAV.
- [47] [J. Dietz, Enterprise Ontology, Springer, 2006.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb47)
- [48] [G. Kassel, A formal ontology of artifacts, Appl. Ontol. 5 (3-4) (2010) 223-246.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb48)
- [49] [D.A. Schön, G. Wiggins, Kinds of seeing and their functions in designing, Des. Stud. 13 (2) (1992) 135-156.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb49)
- [50] [S. Schwartz, Putnam on artifacts, Philos. Rev. 87 (4) (1978) 566-574.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb50)
- [51] [L. Floridi, N. Fresco, G. Primiero, On malfunctioning software, Synthese 192 (4) (2015) 1199-1220.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb51)
- [52] W. Houkes, Designing is the construction of use plans, in: P.E. Vermaas, et al. (Eds.), Philosophy and Design : From Engineering to Architecture, Springer, 2008, pp. 37-49.
- [53] G. Guizzardi, G. Wagner, Disposition and causal laws as the ontological foundation of transition rules in simulation models, in: Proc. of the 2013 Winter Simulation Conference, Washington DC, USA, 2013.
- [54] [T. Schatzki, Social Practices: A Wittgensteinian Approach to Human Activity and the Social, Cambridge University Press, 1996.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb54)
- [55] [P. Faulkner, J. Runde, Getting to Grips with Technology, Mimeo, Cambridge., 2007.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb55)
- [56] R.C. Cummins, Functional analysis, J. Philos. 72 (20) (1975) 741-765, http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2024640.
- [57] J.N. Otte, D. Kiritsi, M.M. Ali, R. Yang, B. Zhang, R. Rudnicki, B. Smith, An ontological approach to representing the product life cycle, Appl. Ontol. 14 (2) (2019) 179-197.
- [58] [J.G. Walls, G. Widmeyer, O.A. El Sawy, Building an information systems theory for vigilant EIS, Inf. Syst. Res. 3 (1) (1992) 36-59.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb58)
- [59] [W.D. Duncan, Ontological distinctions between hardware and software, Appl. Ontol. 12 (1) (2017) 5-32.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb59)
- [60] [C.S. Souza, The Semiotic Engineering of Human-computer Interaction, in: Acting with Technology, MIT Press, 2005.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb60)
- [61] [Y. Elrakaiby, A. Ferrari, J. Mylopoulos, Care: A refinement calculus for requirements engineering based on argumentation semantics, in: 2018 IEEE 26th Int. Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), 2018, pp. 364-369.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb61)
- [62] [W. Houkes, P.E. Vermaas, Contemporary engineering and the metaphysics of artifacts: Beyond the artisan model, The Monist 92 (3) (2009) 403-419.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb62)
- [63] T. Poletaeva, G. Guizzardi, J.P.A. Almeida, H. Abdulrab, Revisiting the DEMO Transaction pattern with the unified foundational ontology (UFO), in: D. Aveiro, et al. (Eds.), Advances in Enterprise Engineering XI. EEWC 2017, in: LNBI, vol. 284, Springer, 2017, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-57955-9\_14.
- [64] [W. Visser, Dynamic Aspects of Design Cognition: Elements for a Cognitive Model of Design (Ph.D Thesis), INRIA, 2004.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb64)
- [65] [K. McPhee, Design Theory and Software Design, Technical report TR 96-26, Univ of Alberta, 1997.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb65)
- [66] [K. Peffers, T. Tuunanen, B. Niehaves, Design science research genres: Introduction to the special issue on exemplars and criteria for applicable design science research, Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 27 (2) (2018) 129-139.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb66)
- [67] H. Weigand, A. Haj-Bouri, Introducing Transformational Design Research: Towards a Communicative Approach on Design Research in Information Systems, 2021, submitted for publication.
- [68] [Ch. Sinha, Language and other artifacts, Front. Psychol. (6) (2015) 1601.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb68)
- [69] W.J. Rapaport, Philosophy of Computer Science, 2015, Current draft in progress at http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/~rapaport/Papers/phics.pdf.
- [70] [N. Irmak, Software is an abstract artifact, Grazer Philos. Stud. 86 (1) (2012) 55-72.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb70)
- [71] M. Boon, T. Knuuttila, Models as epistemic tools in engineering sciences, in: A. Meijers (Ed.), Philosophy of Technology and Engineering Sciences, 2009, pp. 693-726.
- [72] B. France, V.J. Compton, J.K. Gilbert, Understanding modelling in technology and science: The potential of stories from the field, Int. J. Technol. Des. Educ. (21) (2010) 381-394.
- [73] M. Nia, M. de Vries, Models as artifacts of a dual nature: a philosophical contribution to teaching about models designed and used in engineering practice, Int. J. Technol. Des. Educ. 27 (4) (2017) 627-653, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10798-016-9364-1.
- [74] J. De Ridder, Reconstructing Design, Explaining Artifacts: Philosophical Reflections on the Design and Explanation of Technical Artifacts, (Ph.D. Thesis), Delft University of Technology, 2007.
- [75] [M. Suchman, The contract as social artifact, Law Soc. Rev. 37 (1) (2003) 91-142.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0169-023X(21)00005-7/sb75)

Hans Weigand is Associate Professor Information Systems at Tilburg University, The Netherlands.

Paul Johannesson is Full Professor Information Systems at Stockholm University, Sweden.

Birger Andersson is doctoral student Information Systems at Stockholm University, Sweden.
