## Applying the Principles of an Ontology-Based Approach to a Conceptual Schema of Human Genome

Ana Mª Martínez Ferrandis 1 , Oscar Pastor López 1 , and Giancarlo Guizzardi 2

1 Departamento de Sistemas Informáticos y Computación, Universitat Politècnica de València, Spain {amartinez,opastor}@dsic.upv.es 2 Ontology and Conceptual Modeling Research Group, Federal University of Espirito Santo, Brazil gguizzardi@inf.ufes.br

Abstract. Understanding  the  Human  Genome  is  currently  a  significant  challenge. Having a Conceptual Schema of Human Genome (CSHG) is in this context  a  first  step  to  link  a  sound  Information  Systems  Design  approach  with Bioinformatics.  But  this  is  not  enough.    The  use  of  an  adequate  ontological commitment is essential to fix the real-world semantics of the analyzed domain. Starting from a concrete proposal for CSHG, the main goal of this paper is to apply the principles of a foundational ontology, as it is UFO, to make explicit the  ontological  commitments underlying the concepts represented in the Conceptual Schema. As demonstrated in the paper, this ontological analysis is also able to highlight some conceptual drawbacks present in the initial version of the CSHG.

Keywords: Ontology, UFO,  Conceptual  Modeling,  Information  Systems, Bioinformatics.

## 1 Introduction

Genomics is one of  the  most  interesting  research  areas  of  the  Bioinformatics  field. Understanding the Human Genome is currently a significant research challenge but with far reaching implications such as to provide answers to questions like what the concepts that explain ours essential characteristics as species are, or how to prevent disease  within  a  personalized  medicine  context.  Given  the  large  amount  of  data  involved in such as task, and the need to structure, store and manage this data correctly, the  application  of  sound  conceptual  modeling principles is  made necessary. In  fact, the  most  remarkable  properties  of  the  genomic  field  research  are  the  tremendous quantity of data available, its dispersion and the continuous evolution of the involved concepts.  Thus,  having  a  Conceptual  Schema  of  the  Human  Genome  (CSHG)  is  in this  context  a  first  step  to  link  a  sound  Information  Systems  Design  approach  with Bioinformatics. Moreover, given the complexity of the involved notions as well the clear need for autonomous data interoperability, it is essential that these notions are well understood and that their underlying real-world semantics are made explicit.

In this paper, we start from a concrete proposal for a CSHG [1] and illustrate how a foundational ontology (UFO) [2] can be used to make explicit the ontological commitments underlying the concepts that are represented in the Conceptual Schema. The benefits of such an approach are twofold. On one side, we can improve consistency and  understandability  of  the  CSHG  through conceptual  clarification .  On  the  other side, this approach can identify a number of conceptual drawbacks present in the initial version of the quoted CSHG that have been put in evidence and corrected.

In the field of Biology, ontologies are often used as repositories of data, vocabularies,  taxonomies,  etc.  A  well-known,  relevant  example  is  the  Gene  Ontology  [3]. Nevertheless, in contrast with the Gene Ontology, we here strongly advocate the use of foundational ontologies to characterize the real-world semantics that are used in the specification of conceptual genomic models. In this spirit, the work presented here is very much in line with approaches such as in [4], which promote the use of foundational ontologies to avoid errors in the curation and creation of domain models in the biomedical field. However, we here take one step forward from a conceptual modeling  point  of  view,  namely,  we  show  how  the  benefits  of  using  these  foundational theories  can  be  systematically  carried  out  to  conceptual  modeling  by  employing  an ontologically well-founded conceptual modeling language (OntoUML) [2].

The  remainder  of  this  article  is  organized  as  follows.  In  Section  2,  we  briefly present  the  foundation  ontology  UFO  and  its  relation  to  the  OntoUML  conceptual modeling language.    Section 3 explains the use of Conceptual Models in the specification of the Genomics Domain, starting with the Conceptual Schema of the Human Genome (CSHG). In Section 4, we present the main contribution of this paper, namely, the ontological analysis of the CSHG using the approach introduced in section 2. Section 5 presents some final considerations.

## 2 OntoUML as Tool for an Ontological Analysis of the CSHG

In recent years, there has been a growing interest in the application of Foundational Ontologies, i.e., formal ontological theories in the philosophical sense, for providing real-world  semantics  for  conceptual  modeling  languages,  and  theoretically  sound foundations and methodological guidelines for evaluating and improving the individual models produced using these languages. OntoUML [2] is an example of a conceptual  modeling  language  whose  metamodel  has  been  designed  to  comply  with  the ontological  distinctions  and  axiomatic  theories  put  forth  by  a  theoretically  wellgrounded Foundational Ontology [5]. This language has been successfully employed in a number of projects in several different domains including Heart Electrophysiology,  Petroleum  and  Gas,  Software  Engineering,  News  Information  Management, among many others. Asides from the language itself defined with an explicit metamodel  embedded  with  ontological  constraints,  the  OntoUML  approach  includes  a number  of  ontology-based  patterns  and  anti-patterns  (modeling  patterns,  analysis patterns, transformation patterns and validation anti-patterns) as well as a number of automated  tools  for  model  construction,  verification,  validation,  verbalization  and code generation.

In section 4, we introduce some of the OntoUML modeling constructs and briefly elaborate on their ontological semantics as defined in UFO. For a fuller presentation of UFO and OntoUML, containing philosophical justification, empirical support and formal  characterization,  one  should  refer  to  [2,5].  We  focus  the  remainder  of  this paper to illustrate with a preliminary practical exercise how OntoUML can be used to support an ontological analysis of a particular Conceptual Schema of the Human Genome,  making  explicit  its  ontological  commitments,  fixing  a  particular  real-world semantics  for  its  constructs  as  well  as  identifying  conceptual  problems  in  terms  of uncertainty, inconsistencies, lack of constraints and dubious modeling choices.

## 3 Conceptual Schema of Human Genome (CSHG)

This section briefly elaborates on the second fundamental component for the analysis presented  in  this  paper,  namely,  the  Conceptual  Schema  of  the  Human  Genome (CSHG) [1]. This conceptual schema was produced as a result of the Human Genome project  developed  by  Genome  Research  Group  of  the  "Centro  de  Investigación  en Métodos  de  Producción  de  Software  (ProS")  of  the  Universitat  Politècnica  de València.  This  group  is  an  interdisciplinary  group  consisting  of  experts  both  in  the field  of  genomics  and  computer  science  whose  main  goal  is  to  clearly  specify  and represent the genomic domain.

The CSHG consists in four different views, namely, the Variation View, the Phenotypic View, the Transcription View, and the Genome View. In the present article, due  to  space  limitations,  we  focus  on  an  excerpt  of  the  variation  view.  This  view comprises the description of the variations that are found on a gene. Details about this Variation  View  can  be  found  in  [6].  Hereafter,  only  the  needed  fragments  of  the CSHG that were required to understand the analyzed concepts are shown.

## 4 Discussion and Results

In this section we elaborate on some of the outcomes of our analysis. Due to space limitations, in this section, we restrict our discussion to fragments of the redesigned CSHG. A fuller presentation of the complete ontological analysis and redesign of the original conceptual schema will be presented in a subsequent publication. It is important to also highlight the fact that the generated OntoUML model makes explicit the particular  ontological  commitments  underlying  the  CSHG  as  conceived  by  its  creators. Although these particular commitments can be debated, the reason they can be so is exactly because they no longer remain tacit in the creator´s minds.

The human genome is the entire genetic information that a particular individual organism has and that encodes it. It is formed by the set of all the chromosomes on the DNA. In the same manner, chromosomes are formed by a set of genes, which is an ordered sequence of nucleotides in the DNA molecule and contains the information needed for the synthesis of a macromolecule with specific cellular function.

OntoUML makes a fundamental distinction between three different types of substantial entities depending on their unity criteria and the relation they have with their parts. Here, we focus on two of these distinctions, namely, Functional Complexes and Collectives [2,7]. A collective is an entity characterized by the fact that all its constituent parts instantiate the same type and play the same role w.r.t. the whole (e.g., a forest  or  a  crowd).  In  contrast,  the  different  parts  of  a  functional  complex  X  are  of different  types  and  play  different  roles  w.r.t.  to  X.  Examples  of  the  latter  include  a human body, a computer, an organization, a TV set. In OntoUML, identity-providing rigid types whose instances are collectives receive the homonymous stereotype; identity-providing  rigid  types  whose  instances  are  functional  complexes  are  stereotyped with the word «kind».

When analyzing the core concepts of the CSHG in light of these distinctions, we can see that allele, gene and chromosome can be seen as collectives and nucleotide as a  functional  complex  (Fig.  1).  These  distinctions  between  types  used  in  OntoUML make explicit additional information about the nature of each type. This, in turn, prevents an unwarranted interpretation that nucleotide and gene are of the same ontological nature. By making explicit the ontological nature of the entities, we can also systematically  make  explicit  the  different  types  of  parthood  relations  involving  these entities  and  their  respective  parts.  In  Fig.  1b,  we  have  that  nucleotides  are  essential parts of a specific Allele, i.e., besides the relation of parthood, there is an existential dependence relation between an Allele and each of its constituent nucleotides. In other  words,  a  specific  Allele  can  only  exist  (preserving  the  same  identity)  by  having each of these nucleotides as parts. In fact, the identity of an allele is defined by the sum and position (sequence) of its parts.

Fig. 1. (a-left) A fragment of the CSHG and (b-right) its counterpart in OntoUML (core concepts of the variation view)

[FIGURE]

In the previous version of the CSHG (Fig. 1a), the notion of nucleotide was not included. Instead, the attribute sequence was used to express this idea of collective of nucleotides.  The  existential  dependence  from  an  allele  to  a  set  of  nucleotides represents explicitly the relation between the identity criteria of an allele and the ordered sequence of its constituent nucleotides. In the original model, this identity criterion was artificially represented by an assigned object identifier.

Making explicit the different types of entities in the OntoUML model clearly sets out the different types of part-whole relations involving them. OntoUML prescribes four different types of part-whole relations: subQuantityOf (defined between quantities), memberOf (defined  by  individuals  and  the  collectives  they  compose), subCollectiveOf (defined between collectives) and componentOf (defined between functional complexes and their parts). As demonstrated in [2], each of these different types of part-whole  relations  is  correlated  with  different  types  of  meta-properties  regarding existential dependence, transitivity, shareability, among others.

Still regarding part-whole relations, Fig. 1b models that there is a mutual existential dependence between a Gene and its constituent Alleles, i.e., an Allele must be part of particular Gene and a Gene must be composed of that specific set of Alleles. Analogously, an individual gene must be part of a specific chromosome and a chromosome must be composed of that specific set of genes in every situation that it exists. Finally, in OntoUML, we have that a memberOf relation is never transitive, but also that  subCollectiveOf  relations  are  transitive  [7,  8].  For  this  reason,  in  the  model  of Fig. 1b, we have that ultimately a chromosome can be seen as an ordered sequence of nucleotides. However, we also have that none of the parts of a nucleotide are parts of an Allele, of a Gene or of a Chromosome. In the previous version of the CSHG, all the aforementioned information remained tacit in the modeler's mind.

Alleles are specialized as Allelic Variant and Allelic Reference Type . The last is an allele that works as a stable foundation for reporting mutations, in the sense that all the alleles that are different from it (but still related to the same gene) would be classified as Allelic Variant and those differences would be reported as genetic variations. But what makes an allele be considered an allele of reference? The RefSeq project [9] defines the alleles to be used as standards for well-characterized genes. So, an allele becomes an Allelic Reference if there is a record in RefSeq for this allele. Indirectly, this record also makes the remaining alleles from a gene an Allelic Variant .  In  OntoUML, both Allelic  Reference and Allelic  Variant are  considered  types  of Role .  A role is an anti-rigid type (i.e., a type describing contingent properties of its instances) and a relationally dependent one (i.e., a type defined in terms of a relational condition) [2]. In Fig. 1, Allelic Reference is a role (contingently) played by an allele when referred  by  ( related  to )  a  record  in  RefSeq.  Moreover,  an Allelic  Variant is  a  role played by an allele when related to the same gene as an Allelic Reference . Finally, an entity like record in Fig. 1 is modeled in OntoUML by using the notion of a relator . A  relator  is  the  objectification  of  a  relational  property  and  represents  the  so-called truthmaker of a material relation [2]. So, for instance, in the same way that an entity such as a particular marriage (a particular bundle of commitments and claims) is the truthmaker of the relation is-married-to between the individuals John and Mary, the presence of a RefSeq record represents here a binding between RefSeq and a particular allele, thus, making true the relation between an allele playing the role of Allelic Reference and RefSeq. The relations of mediation between the presence of a RefSeq record, RefSeq and the corresponding Allelic Reference (Fig. 2) are relations of existential dependence (the presence of this record depends on RefSeq and on the Allelic Reference) and constitutes the aforementioned binding.

A genetic variation is described as a difference between an Allelic Variant and its Allelic Reference . So, variations are fiat entities but which are existentially dependent on a particular allelic reference and a particular allelic variant.  As referable entities which are existentially dependent on multiple entities, a variation is also represented here  as  a  relator  (Fig.  2).  In  other  words,  a  variation  is  constituted  by  a  number  of nucleotides  which  are  part  of  the Allelic  Variant and  which  vary in  relation  to the Allelic Reference . This analysis reveals a conceptual mistake in the previous version of the CSHG: since the sequence of the Allelic Variant is modeled as derived by the application of the variations that relate it with its Allelic Reference Type ,  the Allelic Variant would be characterized as existentially dependent on the variations and not the  other  way  around.  Notice that,  since  all  parts  of  an  allele  are  essential  to  it,  we have that an Allelic Variant is indeed also existentially dependent on the nucleotides that constitute a variant. The notion of variant itself, however, is a relational notion that depends on both the Allelic Reference and Allelic Variant.

Fig. 2. (a-left) A fragment of the CSHG and (b-right) its counterpart in OntoUML (insertion as a type of variation)

[FIGURE]

Genetic  variations  can  be  further  characterized  depending  on  their  type:  insertions, deletions,  indels  and  inversions.  In  the  CSHG,  they  are  simply  represented  as  subtypes  of  the Variation class.  This  incompleteness  in  the  model,  however,  leaves implicit the fact that each of these variations is derived from different types of base relations .  In  the  redesigned  model,  we  use  the  OntoUML  relator  construct  to represent  explicitly  each  category  of  variation  with  its  characterizing  relations.  The example that we show in Fig. 2 is the case of insertions . In the case of insertions, we have  that  the  nucleotides  that constitute an  insertion  are  parts  of  the  allelic  variant mediated by this variation (i.e., of which this variation depends). In the model of Fig. 2, these nucleotides are said to play the role of inserted nucleotides w.r.t. the allelic variant. Moreover, the part of relation between the former and the latter is explicitly represented in that model. Since an Allelic Variant is a collective, this is an example of  a memberOf relation  [7,  8].  This  model  should  also  include  a  constraint  that  the nucleotides  that  play  the  role  of Inserted  Nucleotides w.r.t.  an Allelic  Variant must constitute the  insertion  which  mediates  that  Allelic  Variant.    Moreover,  the  nucleotides which play the role of Inserted Nucleotides in an insertion and which are members  of  an  Allelic  Variant  are  necessarily  member  of  that  specific  allele  playing the  role  of  Allelic  Variant.  This  inclusion  constraint  is  represented  via  association subseting in Fig. 2b. The need for this constraint can be automatically detected in an OntoUML model since its absence would include in the model an instance of a predefined validation OntoUML anti-pattern [10].

Finally,  in  the  human  genome,  there  is  also  the  notion  of conservative  regions , which are regions that have been in the genome for ages without alteration and which are expected to remain the same in the allelic reference and its variants. We use here a formal  relation  from  the  mereological  theories  underlying  OntoUML  to  model  that there exists a relation of (non-proper) overlapping between an Allelic Reference and its Allelic Variant (Fig.  1  and  Fig.  2).  In  other  words,  Allelic  Reference and  Allelic Variant  must  share  a  common  part.    If  there  is  no  overlapping  between  sequences, then the two alleles belong to different genes. This constraint is of significance when talking about the nature of the alleles and genes, another feature which remains implicit in the previous version of the CSHG.

## 5 Conclusion

In this paper, we start from a concrete proposal for a Conceptual Schema for the Human Genome and illustrate how a principled ontological analysis can be used to make explicit the ontological commitments underlying the concepts that are represented in that  schema.  Moreover,  the  paper  illustrates  an  approach  in  which  this  ontological analysis is performed systematically and is integrated in a classical conceptual modeling engineering activity throughout the use of an ontologically well-founded conceptual  modeling  language  termed  OntoUML  as  well  as  its  associated  methodological tools.

In the redesign of the CSHG as an OntoUML model, a number of implicit assumptions  in  the  original  model  were  made  explicit  as  well  as  a  number  of  conceptual drawbacks  were  identified.  For  instance,  the  introduction  of  the  RefSeq  and  the Record was instrumental for expressing that Allelic Reference and Allelic Variant are contingent roles played by an allele in relational contexts: in order for an allele to be an allelic reference it must be referred by a RefSeq record; in order for an allele to be an allelic variant it must be related to the same gene and non-properly overlap with an allelic reference. Moreover, the use of the formal relation of non-proper overlapping between an Allelic Reference and its Allelic Variant represents the conservative regions  on  the  DNA,  making  explicit  the  constraint  of  the  non-existence  of  'extreme variations' in the domain. Furthermore, modeling the Variation as a relator also expresses its existential dependency on a specific Allelic Variant and on a specific an Allelic Reference. This highlights the doubtful choice of considering the sequence of the Allelic Variant as derived by the application of the variations that relate it with its Allelic  Reference Type. Finally, the use of the mereological relations of memberOf and subcollectiveOf to represent parthood between concepts such as Gene, Nucleotide,  Allele  and  Chromosome  makes explicit the  notion of a chromosome as an ordered sequence of nucleotides.

The analysis presented here concentrates on a small fragment of the Variation view of CSHG. In a future work, we shall present a full analysis of CSHG contemplating all its constituent views. Once we have a complete OntoUML version of the CSHG, we pretend to conduct a full validation with domain experts by using the OntoUML approach of model validation via visual simulation [10]. Finally, after validation, we intend to use the OntoUML tool set to automatically generate OWL specifications for the CSHG. These specifications, in turn, will be employed to support semantic annotation and automated reasoning in a Human Genome Wiki environment.

Acknowledgements: This  work  has  been  developed  with  the  support  of  MICINN under the project PROS-Req TIN2010-19130-C02-02 and the Programa de Apoyo a la Investigación y Desarrollo (PAID-00-12) de la Universitat Politècnica de València, and  co-financed  with  ERDF.  The  third  author  has  been  supported  by  FAPES (PRONEX Grant #52272362/2011).

## References

1. Pastor, O., Levin, A.M., Casamayor, J.C., Celma, M., Eraso, L.E., Villanueva, M.J., PerezAlonso, M.: Enforcing conceptual modeling to improve the understanding of human genome.  In:  2010  Fourth  International  Conference  on  Research  Challenges  in  Information Science (RCIS), pp. 85-92. IEEE (2010)
2. Guizzardi, G.: Ontological foundations for structural conceptual models. CTIT, Centre for Telematics and Information Technology (2005)
3. Ashburner, M., Ball, C.A., Blake, J.A., Botstein, D., Butler, H., Cherry, J.M., Davis, A.P., Dolinski, K., Dwight, S.S., Eppig, J.T.: Gene Ontology: tool for the unification of biology. Nature Genetics 25, 25-29 (2000)
4. Burek, P., Hoehndorf, R., Loebe, F., Visagie, J., Herre, H., Kelso, J.: A top-level ontology of  functions  and  its  application  in  the  Open  Biomedical  Ontologies.  Bioinformatics 22, e66-e73 (2006)
5. Guizzardi, G., Wagner, G.: Using the Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO) as a foundation for general conceptual modeling languages. In: Theory and Applications of Ontology: Computer Applications, pp. 175-196. Springer (2010)
6. Pastor, O., Levin, A.M., Casamayor, J.C., Celma, M., Kroon, M.: A Conceptual Modeling Approach to Improve Human Genome Understanding. In: Handbook of Conceptual Modeling, pp. 517-541. Springer (2011)
7. Guizzardi, G.: Ontological foundations for conceptual part-whole relations: the case of collectives  and  their  parts.  In:  Mouratidis,  H.,  Rolland,  C.  (eds.)  CAiSE  2011.  LNCS, vol. 6741, pp. 138-153. Springer, Heidelberg (2011)
8. Guizzardi, G.: Representing collectives and their members in UML conceptual models: an ontological analysis. In: Trujillo, J., et al. (eds.) ER 2010. LNCS, vol. 6413, pp. 265-274. Springer, Heidelberg (2010)
9. QPruitt, K.D., Tatusova, T., Maglott, D.R.: NCBI reference sequences (RefSeq): a curated non-redundant sequence database of genomes, transcripts and proteins. Nucleic Acids Research 35, D61-D65 (2007)
10. Sales, T.P., Barcelos, P.P.F., Guizzardi, G.: Identification of Semantic Anti-Patterns in Ontology-Driven Conceptual Modeling via Visual Simulation. In: 4th International Workshop on Ontology-Driven Information Systems (ODISE 2012), Graz, Austria (2012)
