## The OntoREA © Accounting and Finance Model: Ontological Conceptualization of the Accounting and Finance Domain

Christian Fischer-Pauzenberger and Walter S.A. Schwaiger ( &amp; )

Institute of Management Science -TU Wien, Vienna, Austria {christian.fischer-pauzenberger, walter.schwaiger}@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract. Geerts and McCarthy [1, 2] extended McCarthy ' s [3] ResourceEvent-Agent (REA) accounting model with a forward-looking perspective by including commitments and economic contracts. Schwaiger [4] investigated the extended REA accounting model with respect to accounting and fi nance requirements and developed the REA-based Asset-Liability-Equity (ALE) accounting model. Due to the ontological neutrality of UML class diagrams [5], fi nancial instruments are not concisely conceptualized. This holds true especially for derivative instruments which have very special temporal modal and identity-related peculiarities. For modeling them the OntoUML language developed by Guizzardi [6] provides a solid foundation. In this article ontological meta-properties of OntoUML are used to specify these peculiarities and to derive the OntoREA © Accounting and Finance Model , which constitutes a valid ontology-based conceptualization of the accounting and fi nance domain. This model should be bene fi cial especially for business analysts who have to understand and develop conceptual models for up-to-date enterprise and accounting information systems.

Keywords: Accounting  Finance  REA accounting model  OntoUML  Uni fi ed Foundational Ontology  Ontology-driven conceptual modeling  Design patterns

## 1 Introduction

Geerts and McCarthy [1, 2] extend McCarthy ' s Resource -Event -Agent (REA) accounting model to the REAC accounting model by introducing the concept of commitments (C). The REAC model goes beyond the accounting domain as it allows the modeling of future events. Furthermore the de fi nition of economic contracts as bundling of commitments opens the model for mapping more complex situations. The REAC accounting model evolved to the REA business ontology as well as the Accounting and economic ontology and was promoted as such as industry standard in (ISO 15944-4, [7]). Schwaiger [4] investigates the REAC accounting model with respect to the traditional Asset-Liability-Equity (ALE) accounting logic. He extends the model by including debit and credit events to address changes in the ALE-categorized economic resources. This semantic extension provides the foundation for modeling non-derivative fi nancial instruments as well and consequently can be understood as an important step for integrating the fi nance within the accounting domain.

© Springer International Publishing AG 2017

One substantial drawback, however, is substantiated within the modeling language of all aforementioned models. The Uni fi ed Modeling Language (UML) class diagrams bear several de fi ciencies for modeling derivative instruments due to their special nature and behavior over time. Unlike tangible resources and non-derivative fi nancial instruments, they can have a value of zero and are likely to change their ALE-status over time. Such meronymic (part-whole) and temporal modal properties can explicitly be speci fi ed in the Uni fi ed Foundational Ontology (UFO), which was established by Guizzardi [6]. Accordingly, it seems worthwhile to conceptualize the fi nance domain in the UFO-based OntoUML language. Furthermore the usage of OntoUML as conceptual modeling language should allow an even deeper integration of the fi nance domain into the accounting domain, as this language was already used for modeling the REA accounting context. Gailly et al. [8] use the OntoUML language to classify the endurant primitives in the REA enterprise domain ontology (REA-EO) in terms of the metaphysical UFO upper-level ontology. Fischer-Pauzenberger and Schwaiger [9] deepen the anchoring of REA-based accounting models in the accounting domain by developing the OntoREA accounting model which represents the REA-based Asset-LiabiliyEquity (ALE) accounting model in terms of the OntoUML language.

The deeper integration of the fi nance into the accounting domain by using the OntoUML language for the ontological conceptualization constitutes the primary research objective of this article. This objective is guided by two principal research questions: What are the special temporal modal and meronymic properties of derivative instruments? Can these properties be modeled within the OntoREA accounting model or is an extension of the model needed?

To address the research objective and to answer the two questions, the special properties of derivative instruments are identi fi ed and speci fi ed according to OntoUML ' s ontological meta-properties and they are integrated into the REA accounting model. The resulting OntoREA © Accounting and Finance Model is derived in two steps. Firstly, the REACaccounting model is transformed into the REA © -based ALE accounting model by modeling the duality as well as the reciprocity relationship in a balanced version that includes the (present) value constraints of business transactions. Secondly, the OntoREA accounting model is extended by incorporating the future related commitment and balanced reciprocity concepts as well as an adequate conceptualization of derivative instruments.

The OntoREA © accounting and fi nance model goes substantially beyond the OntoREA accounting model by modeling the meronymic nature and the temporal modal behavior of derivative instruments with OntoUML ' s Collective , Role and Phase classes. Especially the de fi nition of derivative instruments with the Collective class makes the OntoREA © model very distinct from the OntoREA accounting model which considers such instruments simply as economic resources. Finally, the development of the OntoREA © model is based on the ontology-driven conceptual modeling methodology introduced by Guizzardi et al. [10] and elaborated by Verdonck et al. [11], and its syntactical validity with respect to the UFO axioms is proven by verifying the correct application of the OntoUML design patterns in the OntoUML class diagram representing the OntoREA © accounting and fi nance model.

The remainder of this article is structured as follows. In the next chapter, the REA © accounting model is developed. Its characteristic compared to the REA accounting model is the inclusion of the commitment entity and the rei fi cation of the balanced reciprocity relationship. This relationship acts as truthmaker for the relationship between economic commitments, it refers to the promises of two economic agents to transfer economic resources in the future and it includes the present value constraint. In the following section, the OntoREA Accounting Model is presented and discussed in more detail with respect to its ontological meta-properties. In Sect. 4 the OntoREA © Accounting and Finance Model is developed by modeling the REA © -based ALE accounting model in terms of OntoUML ' s ontological meta-properties. The fi nal section concludes the paper and gives directions for future research.

## 2 REA © Accounting Model: Additional Rei fi cation of the Balanced Reciprocity Relationship

Geerts and McCarthy [1] analyzed the REAC accounting model ontologically and introduced some new components and concepts as commitments and reciprocity as analogue to the duality principle. The same authors [2] extended the model further by integrating policy-level de fi nitions specifying ' what should, could or must be ' . The ISO standard ISO 15944 -4, Business transaction scenarios -Accounting and economic ontology [7] describes economic contracts as economic bundles of economic commitments which ful fi ll the reciprocity principle. The publication also promotes the REA business ontology as recognized international industry standard.

Before going into ontological details the integration of economic contracts (C) into the REAC accounting model is addressed. This model adds the economic commitments to the already existent notion of economic exchange. Commitments do not occur in isolation because partners simply do not agree to value exchanges without reciprocation. ISO/IEC 15944:2007(E) [7]. The speci fi c extensions in the REAC model compared to the REA accounting model are de fi ned as follows [7]:

- An Economic Commitment is a promise to execute an Economic Event at some point in the future.
- A reciprocal relationship is an association between Economic Commitments that each in turn individually fulfills compensating economic events.
- A fulfillment relationship is an association between an Economic Commitment and the Economic Event that executes that commitment.
- An Economic Contract is a bundle of reciprocating commitments wherein two Parties agree to a future schedule of exchanges with compensating economic events. An Agreement is similar to an economic contract, but it is not legally enforceable.
- An economic bundle relationship is an association between an Economic Contract and its pair of reciprocal Economic Commitments.

The REAC accounting model as stated in the ISO/IEC 15944:2007(E) standard is shown in Fig. 1 in form of an UML class diagram. The commitments are modeled on top of the economic events, connected by a ful fi llment relationship and bundled to economic contracts. By using this approach, the REA accounting framework becomes capable of modeling future events, especially future commitments associated with fi nancial instruments.

Fig. 1. REAC accounting model -UML class diagram

[FIGURE]

Although the REAC accounting model is intended to specify the accounting domain as well, it does not cover essential accounting requirements. Schwaiger identi fi ed several de fi ciencies concerning the traditional Asset-Liability-Equity (ALE) accounting logic [12]. In the REAC accounting model, there is no reference to debits, credits and accounts. This however is essential for modeling traditional accounting logic. McCarthy explicitly avoided those classic double-entry bookkeeping elements in his initial design of the REA accounting model to be able to establish a generic framework. However, debit and credit linguistics are essential to give the increment and decrement events of assets, liabilities and equity a consistent interpretation within the ALE-based accounting system.

Schwaiger [4] extends the REAC accounting model by introducing the ALE typifi cation of economic resources, i.e. the inclusion of liabilities and equity next to assets. By integrating this typi fi cation the model is suitable for ALE accounting applications as well as modeling future events. Fischer-Pauzenberger and Schwaiger [9] eliminate the business transaction class from Schwaiger ' s model by putting the value constraint associated with these transactions into the duality relationship. To indicate this integration the relationship is called balanced duality relationship . This can be seen in Fig. 2 in the reflexive relationship under the Economic Event class. Next to that the fi gure contains the balanced reciprocity relationship on top of the Commitment class. This relationship expresses the combined occurrence of future in- and outflowing events that underlie the debited and credited commitments and it includes -like the balanced duality relationship -a value constraint. Due to the future ful fi llment of the commitments the reciprocity relationship includes the commitments ' present values. Finally the Economic Contract class is de fi ned with respect to one or more commitments.

Due to the different extensions the model shown in Fig. 2 is called REA © -based ALE Accounting Model . The © sign is used in order to explicitly indicate its distinction from other REAC model versions. Its conceptualization can be summarized as follows:

Fig. 2. REA © -based ALE accounting model -UML class diagram

[FIGURE]

REA © -based ALE accounting model covers all resources related to assets, liabilities and equity instead of tangible assets and cash only. Furthermore, it features the value flow relationship related to debit and credit events instead of relying on stock flow relationships related to increment and decrement events.

The balanced relationships include the value constraints. In the duality context the constraint requires the equality of the values of the debited and credited events. In the reciprocity context the constraint requires the equality of the commitments ' present values. For illustrative purposes, the balanced reciprocity of a stock forward instrument (for further details see e.g. Hull [13]) is taken: At the day of the contract setting the forward only consists of commitments. The buyer of the forward is committed to receive the stock in the future (debit commitment) and to pay the forward price (credit commitment). The forward seller takes exactly the opposite commitment positions so that the contracting of a forward constitutes a zero sum game.

The balanced reciprocity only requires the equality of the commitment values, but it does not show the speci fi c values of the different commitments involved in the derivative instruments. Consequently for the forward instrument with net value of zero no insights into the different commitments ' values are given and the forward does not appear on the balance sheet. As enterprises -especially banks -often trade huge volumes in derivative instruments the net values are not suf fi cient. Consequently concepts from fi nance are integrated to solve this de fi ciency.

## 3 OntoREA Accounting Model: Ontological MetaProperties -Stereotypes in OntoUML Class Diagrams

Ontology is a philosophical discipline (metaphysics) that addresses existential properties of things. The ontological analysis of Geerts and McCarthy [1] relate to Sowa ' s ontology de fi nition [14]. But there are other de fi nitions as well. According to the research questions the focus of this article refers to the OntoUML language. This language is based on the Uni fi ed Foundational Ontology (UFO) which is influenced by the Four-Category-Ontology from Lowe [15]. UFO covers different scopes, namely UFO-A for the ontology of endurants, UFO-B for the ontology of perdurants and UFO-C covering the ontology of social concepts.

It is important to note that this article only uses endurant constructs and thus UFO-A in order to be in line with the OntoUML-based REA accounting research. In the following the OntoREA accounting model developed by Fischer-Pauzenberger and Schwaiger [9] is presented. It will serve in the subsequent chapter as basis for the deeper integration of fi nance into the accounting domain.

Before the OntoREA accounting model is presented some propaedeutic UFO considerations seem appropriate. A very important UFO meta-property is rigidity . Rigidity in the modal sense regards the necessity of individuals to instantiate given universals throughout time. Anti-rigid universals however, are the ones whose instances contingently instantiate them [16]. Ruy et al. summarizes the ontological meta-properties by giving illustrative examples [17]: By referring to a number of formal and ontological meta -properties, UFO proposes a number of distinctions among object types. Within these, sortal types are types that either provide or carry a uniform principle of identity for their instances. Within sortal types, we have the distinction between rigid and anti -rigid sortals. A rigid type is a type that classifies its instances necessarily (in the modal sense), i.e., the instances of that type cannot cease to be an instance of that type without ceasing to exist. Anti -rigidity, in contrast, characterizes a type whose instances can move in and out of the extension of that type without altering their identity. For instance, contrast the rigid type Person with the anti -rigid types Student or Husband. While the same individual John never ceases to be instance of Person, he can move in and out of the extension of Student or Husband, once he enrolls in/finishes college or marries/divorces, respectively.

In conceptual modeling entity types and relationship types are the most fundamental constructs [18]. Taken from [9] the following entity types (subsequently marked in bolded letters), which are derived from the UFO typi fi cation tree (marked in italic letters) are of importance for the OntoREA accounting model:

- Kinds are rigid substance sortals and they provide their own identity principle (rather than just carrying it). Kinds are also considered as an OntoUML model ' s backbone [19] and they are used to model resources, events and agents as endurants.
- Roles are anti -rigid sortals and therefore can change their instantiation in a modal sense according to an extrinsic generalization condition. Furthermore, Roles are relational-dependent, they have to rely on at least one other universal. Roles get their identity principle through the generalization relation from the instance of its parent universal.
- SubKinds are rigid sortals and do not provide their own identity principle, they are merely inheriting the principle from another Substance Sortal .
- Phases are anti -rigid sortals as well with a signi fi cant distinction to Roles. Phases are relational (i.e. external) independent. Due to the predetermined disjoint and complete generalization sets, instances of Phases, in contrast to instances of Roles,

can change according to their intrinsic (and not extrinsic) generalization condition. As Roles, Phases also get their identity principle through the generalization relation.

Next to the above mentioned entity types the following relationship types will be important for the OntoREA accounting model to be developed:

- Relator Universals , are moment universals which represent the objecti fi cation of a relational property. Relator Universals are existentially dependent on a multitude of individuals, thus, mediating them. Relators are the foundation of the so-called Material Relations [20] and act as truth-makers of the relation.
- Formal Relations hold directly between entities without requiring any intervening individual.

The remaining entity types and relationship types of UFO are not needed for the OntoREA accounting model. The current and complete version of UFO is speci fi ed in the UFO reference [21].

Fig. 3. OntoREA accounting model -OntoUML class diagram

[FIGURE]

These UFO-based entity types and relationship types are the de fi nitions of the stereotypes used in OntoUML class diagrams. In Fig. 3 the OntoREA accounting model is presented in the OntoUML language. It features special modeling characteristics [9], which are briefly elaborated:

- The endurant backbone in the OntoREA model are the rigid Kind classes Economic Resource, Economic Event and Economic Agent.
- The typi fi cation relationship of the Economic Event into the two SubKind classes Debit Event and Credit Event is modeled by a disjoint and complete generalization set. Thus, an event can only be either a debit event or a credit event. This typi fi cation is needed for handling changes in the ALE resource types. An increase in liabilities and equity is related to a credit event, whereas an increase of assets relates to a debit event.

- The ( Material ) balanced duality relationship is modeled via the Relator class Balanced Duality. It acts as truthmaker and rei fi es the relationship between the endurant debit event and the endurant credit event. The balanced duality relationship incorporates the value constraint so that the debit and credit events have the equal values. Furthermore the duality relationship is not only referring to the value constraint for keeping the balance in the fundamental ALE-equation ( classificational double entry), but it also describes a REA-based cause-effect relationship ( causal double entry).
- The modal meta-property is used for conceptualizing the temporal modal behavior of claims [9]. Claims are de fi ned as imbalances in the balanced duality relationship that are neither assets nor liabilities or equity. When claims materialize, they convert to their corresponding resource types.
- The use of Phase classes for modeling the typi fi cation of the Kind class Economic Resources introduces the modal meta-property into the OntoREA model. The Phase class is an anti-rigid, non-identity providing sortal which receives its identity from its superclass in the inheritance relationship. The anti-rigidity allows the economic resources to change Phases over time without losing identity.

## 4 OntoREA © Accounting and Finance Model: Collectives Beyond ALE Phases

After de fi ning the balanced reciprocity relationship in Sect. 2 and illustrating the OntoREA accounting model in Sect. 3, both parts can be integrated. Before that, the balanced reciprocity relationship is conceptualized in the OntoUML language. All subsequent OntoUML models are implemented in the open-source tool Menthor Editor [22] as well as the proprietary Enterprise Architect from Sparkx . An important bene fi t of these modeling support tools lies in their built-in quality control functions. According to this support function the syntactic correctness of the developed OntoUML class diagram is assured. This validation tool is used throughout the paper so that the syntactic validity of all developed OntoUML models is proven.

Figure 4 contains the balanced reciprocity relationship. The Kind class Commitment is like the Kind class Economic Event typi fi ed by two disjoint subsets in form of SubKind classes for the Debit and Credit Commitment. Both classes are related in the balanced reciprocity relationship. In this Material relationship the balanced reciprocity is rei fi ed by the Relator class. Furthermore the balanced reciprocity relationship includes the present value constraint. This ensures that the (present) value of the debit commitments has to be equal to the (present) value of credit commitments. Finally the Kind classes Commitment and Economic Event are in a Formal ful fi llment association. Its cardinalities indicate that a commitment relates to at least one economic event, whereas an economic event can but must not have a commitment.

Now the dynamic modal behavior of a derivative instrument is elaborated in the context of a stock forward instrument . The value of the forward is derived from the price of its underlying stock. Initially the forward price is set in such a way that the forward value has a value of zero. Over time the value of the stock forward changes according to changes in the prices of its underlying stock. For the buyer of the forward the value of the forward becomes ceteris paribus negative (positive) if the stock price goes up (down). At a subsequent measurement date a positive (negative) value of the forward is recorded as an asset (liability) in the balance sheet. In the double-entry bookkeeping accounting system the recognition as asset is recorded by debiting the fi nancial asset account and by crediting the fi nancial revenue account. A liability is recorded by debiting the fi nancial expense account and crediting the liability account.

Fig. 4. Balanced reciprocity relationship -OntoUML class diagram

[FIGURE]

From the fi nance perspective these value changes of the stock forward can be explained by the no -arbitrage pricing theory which was introduced by the Nobel laureates Merton [23] and Black/Scholes [24]. An easier accessible approach to this theory is the discrete time approach introduced by Cox, Ross and Rubinstein. Applied to the stock forward instrument it can be shown that the forward value is equal to the sum of the values of the assets (A) and liabilities (L) in the forward hedging portfolio [25, p. 233]. The A/L hedging portfolio representation underlying the no-arbitrage pricing proposition explains the meronymic peculiarity of derivative instruments. On the one side, the derivative instrument class is a rigid sortal universal that provides the identity principle to its instantiations. On the other side, the identity principle cannot be related to the ALE typi fi cation of the economic resources as derivative instruments can change their ALE-status quite easily and often over time. The changes between on- and off-balance sheet as well as asset and liability position make the derivative instruments even very distinct from claims. Claims can only change from offto on-balance positions but not from assets to liability or vice versa. Hence the ALE-based typi fi cation of the economic resources is not suf fi cient for derivative instruments.

The ontological foundation of OntoUML shows very bene fi cial for solving this problem. Of importance are the meronymic meta-properties which address the different types of parthood relationships and de fi ne the special rigid and identity principle providing universal, i.e. the Collective universal. The Collective universal has the same ontological meta-properties as the Kind universal. The difference lies in the scope of the universals. The Kind universal speci fi es individual universals whereas the Collective universal goes beyond individual universals by specifying collections. The Beatles are an example for such a collection. Seen as an instantiation of a Collective universal the Beatles as a group has its own identity. The members of the Beatles as persons are instantiations of a Kind universal and consequently have their personal identity. It is important not to confuse the personal identity with the identity of the group. In OntoUML this distinction relates to the meronymic meta-property of a MemberOf parthood-relationship. Due to the different identities of the group as a whole and its individual members it is possible that group member leave or join the group without changing the group identity. Applied to the Beatles example this happened when Pete Best left the group and Ringo Starr joint it.

In the light of the no -arbitrage A/L hedging portfolio representation a derivative instrument is a collective and its members are assets and liabilities composing the A/L hedging portfolio. Hence the fi rst research question can now be answered: Financial derivatives are a Collective universal with a MemberOf parthood-relationship to its members that are economic resources in form of assets and liabilities. With this answer also the second question can be answered: The existing REA-based ALE accounting framework has no Collective universals included so that it has to be extended in order to include the meronymic peculiarities of derivative instruments.

The needed extension of the REA-based ALE accounting framework can be seen in the top-left corner of Fig. 5. It shows the Collective class Derivative Instrument. This class has a MemberOf relationship to the Kind class Economic Resource. The cardinality says that derivative instruments have two economic resource members, i.e. one asset and one liability. Furthermore the Collective class Derivative Instrument is typi fi ed via a Phase partition that consists of the Phase classes Asset, Liability and Null. According to this the derivate instruments can change the phases over time without losing its identity by switching from the Phase Null, i.e. an off-balance position, into an on-balance position either to the Phase Asset or the Phase Liability and so on.

The overall conceptualization in Fig. 5 represents the OntoREA © Accounting and Finance Model . By modeling the derivative instrument as a Collective class this model goes substantially beyond the REA-based ALE accounting. Derivative instruments are no longer seen as economic resources related to a Kind class. Instead they are seen by their no-arbitrage representation as a collection (hedging portfolio) of asset and liability resources which have their own identity principles. The big advantage of explicitly including the derivative instruments in form of their no-arbitrage A/L hedging portfolio lies in the added flexibility: Depending on the purpose the derivate instruments can be shown on a net basis for fi nancial reporting purposes or on an un-consolidated basis for strategic and management control purposes.

Fig. 5. OntoREA © accounting and fi nance model -OntoUML class diagram

[FIGURE]

Finally the double nature of the balanced reciprocity relationship has to be mentioned. In Fig. 5 this can be seen by the additional term Economic Contract set in parenthesis. The reason for the double nature is due to the fact that actually the economic contract is the truthmaker in the Relator class Balanced Reciprocity by which the debit and credit commitments between the two involved agents are contractually determined. Hence derivative instruments are special economic contracts for which the temporal modal peculiarities are explicitly speci fi ed.

## 5 Conclusions

The primary research objective addressed in this article relates to the deeper anchoring of the fi nance domain into the accounting domain. In order to achieve this the temporal modal and meronymic properties of derivative instruments had to be identi fi ed, speci fi ed and integrated into the REA-based ALE accounting framework. For this purpose the UFO-ontological foundation of Guizzardi ' s OntoUML language showed to be the key as this foundation provides a precise understanding for investigating existence, identity and rigidity related topics. This foundation was used to specify the derivative instruments according to the no-arbitrage A/L hedging portfolio representation as a Collective universal with MemberOf parthood relationships to economic resources in form of assets and liabilities. Their temporal modal behavior, where derivative instruments -what especially relates to forward contracts -can switch between asset, liability and off-balance position, was captured by Phase universals. These universals allow anti-rigidity what underlies the temporal modal behavior and that cannot be modeled in the ontologically neutral UML class diagrams.

Equipped with these ontological meta-properties Geerts and McCarthy ' s REAC accounting model was extended. In the fi rst step the balanced reciprocity relationship was de fi ned. Then the OntoREA accounting model [9] was presented. Finally the OntoREA © accounting and fi nance model was developed by integrating the collective conceptualization of the derivative instrument and the balanced reciprocity relationship with the economic contract as truthmaker into the OntoREA model.

The syntactical validity of the OntoREA © accounting and fi nance model with respect to OntoUML modeling rules is assured by applying a reactive validation strategy speci fi ed in the ontology-driven conceptual modeling methodology [10, 11]. This validation strategy is implemented by using the open-source tool Menthor Editor [22] as well as the proprietary Enterprise Architect from Sparkx where the compliance with the ontological distinctions and UFO axioms underlying the OntoUML language is continuously checked during the subsequent combinations of the pre-de fi ned ontological design patterns within the conceptual modeling process. In order to provide a deeper validation next to the current validation two additional steps will be taken in the future: A model simulation in the logic-based Alloy language for detecting possible misspeci fi cations and the usage of real derivative instrument cases for demonstrating and assessing the model ' s adequacy.

The resulting model can be used for different purposes. One possibility is its usage in the accounting (AIS -see Steinbart and Romney [26]) as well as enterprise information systems (EIS -see Dunn et al. [27]) research by establishing ontology-based accounting and enterprise information systems. Such systems could be designed and implemented e.g. within a model-driven software development approach (see e.g. Brambilla et al. [28], Stahl and V ö lter [29] or Rybola et al. [30]) by establishing the OntoREA © model fi rst and subsequently transforming it into a software application.

Finally, an interesting idea for future research relates to the used UFO ontology. Instead of only using enduring entities from UFO-A for all REA primitives, it seems worthwhile to model economic events via perduring entities from UFO-B and economic agents via agents as described in UFO-C. By doing this, enterprise models can be developed that cover a much broader scope compared to the narrow compliance requirements within the ALE accounting domain. This would require a complete redesign and would contribute to the ongoing discussions [31].

## References

1. Geerts, G.L., McCarthy, W.E.: An ontological analysis of the economic primitives of the extended-REA enterprise information architecture. Int. J. Account. Inf. Syst. 3 , 1 -16 (2002)
2. Geerts, G.L., McCarthy, W.E.: Policy level speci fi cations in REA enterprise information systems. J. Inf. Syst. 20 , 37 -63 (2006)
3. McCarthy, W.E.: The REA accounting model: a generalized framework for accounting systems in a shared data environment. Account. Rev. 554 -578 (1982)
4. Schwaiger, W.S.A.: The REA accounting model: enhancing understandability and applicability. In: Johannesson, P., Lee, M.L., Liddle, S.W., Opdahl, A.L., L ó pez, Ó . P. (eds.) ER 2015. LNCS, vol. 9381, pp. 566 -573. Springer, Cham (2015). doi:10.1007/9783-319-25264-3\_43
5. Karlsson, F., Linander, F., von Sch é ele, F.: A conceptual framework for time distortion analysis in method components. In: Bider, I., Gaaloul, K., Krogstie, J., Nurcan, S., Proper, H.A., Schmidt, R., Soffer, P. (eds.) BPMDS/EMMSAD-2014. LNBIP, vol. 175, pp. 454 -463. Springer, Heidelberg (2014). doi:10.1007/978-3-662-43745-2\_31
6. Guizzardi, G.: Ontological foundations for structural conceptual model. http://doc.utwente. nl/50826 (2005)
7. Standardization/International, E.C.I.O. for: Information Technology -Business Operational View -Part 4: Business Transactions Scenarios -Accounting and Economic Ontology. ISO/IEC FDIS. 15944 (2007)
8. Gailly, F., Geerts, G., Poels, G.: Ontological reengineering of the REA-EO using UFO. In: OOPSLA Workshop on Ontological Software Engineering (2009)
9. Fischer-Pauzenberger, C., Schwaiger, W.S.A.: The OntoREA accounting model: ontology-based modeling of the accounting domain. Complex Syst. Inform. Model. Q. 54 , 20 -37 (2017)
10. Guizzardi, G., Das Gra ç as, A.P., Guizzardi, R.S.S.: Design patterns and inductive modeling rules to support the construction of ontologically well-founded conceptual models in OntoUML. In: Salinesi, C., Pastor, O. (eds.) CAiSE 2011. LNBIP, vol. 83, pp. 402 -413. Springer, Heidelberg (2011). doi:10.1007/978-3-642-22056-2\_44
11. Verdonck, M., Gailly, F., De Cesare, S., Poels, G.: Ontology-driven conceptual modeling: a systematic literature mapping and review. Appl. Ontol. 10 , 197 -227 (2015)
12. Horngren, C., Harrison, W., Oliver, S., Best, P., Fraser, D., Tan, R., Willett, R.: Accounting. Pearson Higher Education AU, New York (2012)
13. Hull, J.C.: Options, Futures, and Other Derivatives. Pearson Education, London (2009)
14. Sowa, J.F.: Knowledge Representation: Logical, Philosophical, and Computational Foundations. Brooks/Cole Publishing, Paci fi c Grove (2000)
15. Lowe, E.J.: The Four-Category Ontology: A Metaphysical Foundation for Natural Science. Oxford University Press (2006)
16. Sales, T.P.: Ontology Validation for Managers (2014)
17. Ruy, F.B., Reginato, C.C., Santos, V.A., Falbo, R.A., Guizzardi, G.: Ontology engineering by combining ontology patterns. In: Johannesson, P., Lee, M.L., Liddle, S.W., Opdahl, A.L., L ó pez, Ó .P. (eds.) ER 2015. LNCS, vol. 9381, pp. 173 -186. Springer, Cham (2015). doi:10. 1007/978-3-319-25264-3\_13
18. Guizzardi, G., Wagner, G., Almeida, J.P.A., Guizzardi, R.S.S.: Towards ontological foundations for conceptual modeling: the uni fi ed foundational ontology (UFO) story. Appl. Ontol. 10 , 259 -271 (2015)

19. Rybola, Z., Pergl, R.: Towards OntoUML for software engineering: introduction to the transformation of OntoUML into relational databases. In: Pergl, R., Molhanec, M., Babkin, E., Fosso Wamba, S. (eds.) EOMAS 2016. LNBIP, vol. 272, pp. 67 -83. Springer, Cham (2016). doi:10.1007/978-3-319-49454-8\_5
20. Sales, T., Barcelos, P., Guizzardi, G.: Identi fi cation of semantic anti-patterns in ontology-driven conceptual modeling via visual simulation. In: 4th International Workshop on Ontology Information System (ODISE 2012), Graz, Austria (2012)
21. Ontology Project: UFO-A Speci fi cation. http://ontology.com.br/ufo-a/spec/
22. [Menthor Editor on github. https://github.com/MenthorTools/menthor-editor](https://github.com/MenthorTools/menthor-editor)
23. Merton, R.C.: Theory of rational theory option pricing. Bell J. Econ. 4 , 141 -183 (1973)
24. Black, F., Scholes, M.: The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. J. Polit. Econ. 81 , 637 (1973)
25. Cox, J.C., Ross, S.A., Rubinstein, M.: Option pricing: a simpli fi ed approach. J. Financ. Econ. 7 , 229 -263 (1979)
26. Romney, M., Steinbart, P., Mula, J., McNamara, R., Tonkin, T.: Accounting Information Systems. Pearson Higher Education AU, New York (2012)
27. Dunn, C.L., Hollander, A.S., Cherrington, J.O.: Enterprise Information Systems: A Pattern-Based Approach. McGraw-Hill/Irwin, New York (2005)
28. Brambilla, M., Cabot, J., Wimmer, M.: Model-driven software engineering in practice. Synth. Lect. Softw. Eng. 1 (1), 1 -182 (2012)
29. V ö lter, M., Stahl, T., Bettin, J., Haase, A., Helsen, S.: Model-Driven Software Development: Technology, Engineering, Management. Wiley, Hoboken (2013)
30. Pergl, R., Sales, T.P., Rybola, Z.: Towards OntoUML for software engineering: from domain ontology to implementation model. In: Cuzzocrea, A., Maabout, S. (eds.) MEDI 2013. LNCS, vol. 8216, pp. 249 -263. Springer, Heidelberg (2013). doi:10.1007/978-3-64241366-7\_21
31. Guizzardi, G., Guarino, N., Almeida, J.P.A.: Ontological considerations about the representation of events and endurants in business models, pp. 1 -16 (2016)
