## Towards a Commitment-based Reference Ontology for Services

Julio Cesar Nardi 1,2 , Ricardo de Almeida Falbo 2 , João Paulo A. Almeida 2 , Giancarlo Guizzardi 2 , Luís Ferreira Pires 3 , Marten J. van Sinderen 3 , Nicola Guarino 4

1 Informatics Department, Federal Institute of Espírito Santo, Colatina, Brazil

2 Ontology &amp; Conceptual Modeling Research Group (NEMO), Federal University of Espírito Santo, Vitória, Brazil 3 Centre for Telematics and Information Technology, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands 4 Laboratory for Applied Ontology, Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, Trento, Italy

julionardi@ifes.edu.br, {falbo, jpalmeida, gguizzardi}@inf.ufes.br,

{l.ferreirapires, m.j.vansinderen}@utwente.nl, nicola.guarino@cnr.it

Abstract - The concept of 'service' has been characterized by different  disciplines  and  authors  from  various  points  of  view. The  variety of characterizations reveals that this notion, although  an  intuitive  one,  is  far  from  trivial.    Given  the importance  of  services  in  enterprise  computing  and  Service Science in general, we believe that a clear account of services and service-related concepts is necessary and would serve as a basis for communication, consensus and alignment of various approaches  and  perspectives.  In  this  paper  we  propose  a commitment-based account of the notion of service captured in a  core  reference  ontology  called  UFO-S.  We  address  the commitments established between service providers and customers, and show how such commitments affect the service lifecycle.  We  show  that  the  commitment-based  account  can serve to harmonize different notions of service in the literature.

Keywords: service science, service computing, core ontology.

## I. INTRODUCTION

The  notion  of  'service'  has  had  a  major  impact  on Marketing,  Operations  and  Computer  Science  over  the  last decades, leading to cross-discipline efforts under the banners of  'Service  Science'  and  'Service  Computing'.  Several authors  from  different  disciplines  have  attempted  to  define this notion under various perspectives, leading to a variety of characterizations  for  'services',  each  emphasizing  different aspects.  For example, the service as interaction perspective focuses  on  the  interactions  among  service  participants  to achieve results or  generate effects [1]; service as  value  cocreation focuses  on services as the  basis  of  economic exchange  [2][3][4] ;  service  as  capability focuses  on  the capability  of  a  provider  to  produce  benefits  to  customers (e.g.,  [5][6]); service as application of competences focuses on the manifestation of the capability of one party to act in benefit  of  another  party  [2];  finally, service  as  software focuses on pieces of software that can be accessed through well-defined interfaces [7].

We believe these characterizations are influenced, among others, by many aspects, such as the research community to which their authors belong (e.g., Service Science, or Service Computing), the targeted application area (e.g., Data Communication, or Enterprise Architecture), or the layer in an Enterprise Architecture (Business, Application, and Technology  [8]).  The  variety  of  characterizations  for  the notion  of  service  reveals  that  it  is  far  from  trivial.  As  a consequence,  under  close  inspection,  we  can  conclude  that the term 'service' often denotes different (possibly related) underlying concepts. As discussed by Alter in [9], 'even if different  communities  of  practice  can  live  with  their  own somewhat inconsistent views of service, conflicting views of service surely cannot facilitate effective  communication between business and IT practitioners and between business and computer science researchers'.

Given the importance of services in Services Computing and  Service  Science  in  general,  we  believe  that  a  clear account  the  underlying  concepts  is  necessary  and  would serve as a basis for communication, consensus and alignment of the various approaches and perspectives. Thus, the account we propose in this paper is intended to address the notion  of  service  broadly,  with  application  to  both  Service Science and Service Computing. We approach this account by  proposing  a core  reference  ontology  for  services called UFO-S.

As a core ontology [10][11], UFO-S refines concepts of a foundational ontology, by providing a conceptualization for services that is independent of a particular application domain. The foundational ontology we adopt is the Unified Foundational  Ontology  (UFO)  [12][13],  which  provides  us with  basic  concepts  for  objects  and  events,  their  types, relations  and  properties,  as  well  as  intentional  and  social elements  to  account  for  agents,  the  social  relations  they establish,  the  actions  they  undertake,  etc.  By  grounding UFO-S  in  a  foundational  ontology  we  are  able  to  reveal important  conceptual  distinctions  that  would  otherwise  be ignored in informal characterizations of services.

Our account builds upon earlier works that treat services under the perspective of the commitments involved in service relations [14][15][16][17]. This perspective emphasizes that throughout  the  service  life-cycle,  commitments  of  several natures are established between service providers and service customers. We address three main aspects: (i) the characterization of commitments (and corresponding claims) in  service  relationships;  (ii)  the  roles  played  by  agents  in service  relationships,  as  a  consequence  of  the  established commitments;  and  (iii)  the  dynamics  of  the  relationships between  the  agents  along  the  service  life-cycle,  in  which commitments are established and fulfilled.

This  paper  is  further  structured  as  follows:  Section  II motivates the commitment-based characterization of services;  Section  III  presents  the  foundational  ontology  we adopt  as  a  basis  for  UFO-S;  Section  IV  presents  UFO-S; Section V evaluates UFO-S by showing how it explains and relates  various  service  perspectives;  Section  VI  discusses related work; and, Section VII presents our conclusions.

[FIGURE]

## II. SERVICE AND COMMITMENTS

A  number  of  works  in  Service  Science  [9][15][17]  and Service Computing [18][19][20] explicitly mention commitments/promises/obligations established between service participants in the service life-cycle. For Dumas et al. [20], a service instance is essentially a promise by one party (the  provider),  to  perform  a  function  on  behalf  of  another party (the consumer). Ferrario and Guarino [15] associate the concept  of service  to  an  explicit  commitment  between provider and customer, and also to the corresponding service process. Santos et al. [18] define service as a temporal entity related  to  the  commitment  (the  service  agreement)  of  the provider in performing a type of action on behalf of a client whose outcome satisfies a client's goal. Sullivan [19] defines the notion of 'obligation' for capturing the responsibilities of both the service provider and the service requester.

The benefits of a characterization based on commitments have been discussed from the perspective of business [17] as well  as  IT  [16].  For  example,  Alter  [9]  points  out  that  the balance of the (co)responsibilities, associated to the importance of commitments for governing service delivery, are  important  aspects  for  characterizing  service  dynamics. Mingming and Youbei [17] highlight that service commitments are useful to deal with service intangibility, by offering  means  to  convert  intangible  service  aspects  into more  'concrete  service  standards'.  Singh  and  colleagues [16]  remark  that  commitments  can  be  used  for  raising  the low-level of abstraction of existing service-oriented architectures, allowing to reduce the gap between the business and the IT perspectives. In their view, commitments capture business meaning, which is not directly represented in process-oriented approaches such as BPMN [16].

Further, some kinds of service business models cannot be suitably explained without the notion of  commitments. Ferrario  and  Guarino  [15]  explain  that  by  using  as  an example  an  insurance  service,  in  which  the  customer  pays for  having  someone  (an  insurer)  who  is  committed  to intervene  in  case  of  an  accident.  Arguably,  the  customer hopes that the actions of the service process are never to be performed.  In  this  case,  the  service  is  provided  by  the existence of a commitment even if no actions are executed.

Commitments  affect  the  overall  life-cycle  of  services including  (i)  service  offer,  (ii)  service  negotiation,  and  (iii) service  delivery. Service  offer is  the  initial  phase  in  which services are presented to target customers, and service aspects such as provider availability, pricing,  payment, security, quality of service, and reputation [20] are described and  published. Service  negotiation is  characterized  by  the interaction between  customer  and  provider in order to establish  an  agreement  about  their  responsibilities  [15].  If service negotiation is successfully achieved, a service agreement is established, determining what has been settled between  service  participants  for  service  delivery.  Finally, service delivery concerns the execution of actions  to fulfill the  established  commitments  [20].  The  broad  impact  of commitments in the service life-cycle, as well as the benefits of such a view, motivate us to consider a commitment-based account as a focal point for our core ontology for services.

## III. THE UNIFIED FOUNDATIONAL ONTOLOGY

Since it is defined as a core ontology, UFO-S is situated in a region between foundational and domain ontologies. A core ontology provides a refinement to a foundational ontology  in  a  specific  field.  In  this  sense,  foundational ontologies serve as basis for core ontologies, as core ontologies do for domain ontologies [11]. In accordance with this  view,  UFO-S was designed taking as basis the Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO).

UFO  is  a  foundational  ontology  developed  with  an interdisciplinary  approach  inspired  by  Formal  Ontology, Philosophical Logic, Linguistics, and Cognitive Psychology. It is based on DOLCE [21], OntoClean [22], and GFO/GOL [23]. It consists of three main parts: UFO-A, an ontology of endurants (objects)  [12],  UFO-B,  an  ontology  of events (perdurants) [13], and UFO-C [13][24], an ontology of social entities built on the top of UFO-A and UFO-B.

Our choice of using UFO can be justified by successful application of this foundational ontology in previous works to  evaluate,  redesign,  and  ground  ontologies,  models,  and frameworks  of  several  research  areas,  such  as  Software Engineering, Conceptual Modeling, and Enterprise Modeling [13][25][26][27][28][29]. The UFO fragments that are relevant to this work are presented below.

## A. UFO-A and UFO-B

The  fundamental  distinction  in  UFO  [12]  is  between individuals and universals. Individuals are  entities that exist in reality and possess a unique identity, while universals are patterns  of  features  that  can  be  realized  in  a  number  of different  individuals.  UFO-A  is  an  ontology  of  endurants whose  patterns  of  features  are  called endurant  universals [12].  UFO-B, in turn, is an ontology of events (perdurants) whose patterns of features are event universals [13].

Fig. 1 presents a fragment of UFO (A and B) that focuses on categories of individuals.

Figure 1. A fragment of UFO-A and UFO-B (Individuals).

[FIGURE]

Endurants are individuals that are wholly present whenever they are present, and can be divided into substantials and moments. Substantials are existentially independent  endurants  (e.g.,  a  person,  a  car). Moments are individuals that can only exist in other individuals, and, thus, they  are  existentially  dependent  on  their  bearers  (e.g.,  a person's headache, a covalent bond between atoms) [12].

Intrinsic moments are dependent on one single individual (e.g., an apple's color). Modes are intrinsic moments that are not directly measurable  (e.g.,  John's  desires, intentions, perceptions, symptoms,  skills)  [12]. Following  [30][31], dispositions in UFO are intrinsic moments (e.g., the fragility of a glass) that are manifested in particular situations through the occurrence of certain events, and that can also fail to be manifested. Take for example the disposition of a magnet to attract  metallic  material.  The  magnet  has  this  disposition even if it is never manifested, e.g., because the magnet was never  close  to  any  magnetic  material.  Nonetheless,  it  can certainly be said to possess that intrinsic property.

Relators are moments that existentially depend on two or more  endurants  (e.g.,  an  employment,  an  enrollment,  a medical  treatment,  a  marriage)  [12].  For  example,  consider that John and Mary are married. In this case, the relator (their marriage)  aggregates  all  externally-dependent  modes  that they acquire by virtue of participating in this relation (e.g, all commitments and claims towards each other) and that share the same foundational event (in this case the wedding event). In our example, John bears responsibilities and rights towards Mary. As counterpart, Mary bears the properties she acquires by being married with John.

Fig. 2 presents a fragment of UFO (A and B) that focuses on the categories of universals.

Figure 2. A fragment of UFO-A and UFO-B (Universals).

[FIGURE]

In  UFO-A, substantial  universal and moment universal are  kinds  of  universals  whose  individuals  are  substantial individuals and moments [12], respectively. Concerning the substantial universal hierarchy, Sortal universals are substantial  universals  that  carry  a  principle  of  identity  for their individuals (e.g., Apple, Person, Student). The specialization of Sortal  Universal is  based  on  a  metaproperty called rigidity. A universal is rigid if it necessarily applies  to  its  instances,  i.e.,  in  every  possible  world  (e.g., Apple, Person). Kinds are rigid sortal universals that provide a principle of identity for substantial individuals that instantiate  them  (e.g.,  Person). Collective  Universals are rigid universals that represent collections of individuals with uniform  structure  (e.g.,  deck  of  cards,  a  forest,  a  group  of people, a pile of bricks). This universal provides a principle of  identity  for  the  instances  of  that  collection  (but  not  for every individual in the collection), which can be intensional or extensional [12]. In contrast to rigid universals, a universal is anti-rigid if it does not apply necessarily to all its instances. For example, an individual x , which is an instance of the universal Student in a world w1 can cease to instantiate this universal in another world w2 without ceasing to exist as the same individual (i.e., as the same Person). Roles are antirigid and relationally-dependent sortal universals (e.g., Student) [12]. This means that roles are played by an object whenever there is a relator connecting it to other objects.

Mixin Universals are substantial universals that represent an  abstraction  of  properties  that  are  common  to  multiple disjoint kinds and, therefore, do not carry a unique principle of  identity  for  their  instances  (e.g.,  Physical  Object,  Living Entity). Category represents a rigid and relationallyindependent mixin universal that aggregates essential properties that are common to different kinds (e.g., Intelligent  Agent). Role  Mixin ,  in  turn,  represents  an  antirigid  and  externally-dependent  non-sortal  universal,  which aggregates properties that are common to different roles.

Finally,  as  opposed  to  endurants, events are  individuals composed  of  temporal  parts.  They  happen  in  time  in  the sense that they extend in time and accumulate temporal parts (e.g., a conversation, a business process). Whenever an event is  present,  it  is  not  the  case  that  all  its  temporal  parts  are present. Event universals are patterns of features that can be realized in a number of different events [13]. Events can be complex  or  atomic. Atomic  events have  no  proper  parts. Complex  events are  aggregations  of  at  least  two  disjoint events [13]. The notion of foundation as a type of historical dependence [32][33] offers an important grounding for associating events  to relators,  since  relators  are  founded  by events.  For  example,  the marriage relator  is  founded  on  a particular wedding event  [32].  In  this  work,  this  notion  is important because it offers means to explain the association between  events  in  a  service  life-cycle,  and  the  relators created  among  service  participants,  as  discussed  in  Section IV.

## B. UFO-C

UFO-C is an ontology of social entities that specializes UFO-A and UFO-B [13][24]. A basic distinction in UFO-C is  related  to  agents  and  (non-agentive)  objects. Agents are agentive substantial individuals that are classified as physical agents (e.g., a person) or social agents (e.g., an organization, a  society). Objects are  non-agentive  substantial  individuals that  are  classified  in physical objects (e.g.,  a  book,  a  table) and social  objects (e.g.,  money,  language).  A normative description is a type of social object that defines one or more rules/norms recognized by at least one social agent, and that can define nominal universals, such as social  moment universals  (e.g.,  social  commitment  types),  social  objects (e.g., the crown of the King of Spain) and social roles (e.g., president, or pedestrian). Examples of normative descriptions include  contracts  in  general,  but  also  sets  of  directives  on how  to  perform  actions  within  an  organization.  A  plan description  is  a  special  type  of  normative  description  that describes  complex  action  universals  (complex  plans)  [25] (e.g., process, and guidelines). Fig. 3 presents a fragment of UFO-C that  focuses  on  the  distinction  between  agents  and objects, and on the definition of normative description.

Figure 3. Agents, Objects, and Normative Description.

[FIGURE]

Figure 4 presents a fragment of UFO-C that focuses on types  of  intentional  moments. Agents are  substantials  that can bear special types of modes named intentional moments . In  this  case,  intentionality  refers  to  the  capacity  of  some properties of certain individuals to refer to possible situations in  reality.  Thus,  intentional  moments  have  a  propositional content ( proposition ), which is an abstract representation of a class of situations referred by that intentional moment.

Figure 4. Actions, mental moments and social moments.

[FIGURE]

Intentional moments inhere in agents and can be mental or social. Mental  moments are  specialized  in  intentions (internal  commitments),  beliefs,  and  desires. Belief can  be justified  by  situations  in  reality  (e.g.,  my  belief  that  the Moon  orbits  the  Earth). Desires and intentions can  be fulfilled or frustrated. Whilst a desire expresses a will of an agent  towards  a  state  of  affairs  in  reality,  intentions  are desired  state  of  affairs  for  which  the  agent  commits  to pursuing  [34][35].  Intentions  cause  the  agent  to  perform actions. Actions are  types  of  events  that  can  be  complex or atomic. Communicative  acts (a  speech  act  such  as  inform, ask  or  promise  in  the  sense  of  [34])  are  types  of  atomic actions [13]. Interactions are  types  of  complex  actions composed of action contributions from different agents.

Social moments are types of intentional moments that are created  by  social  actions  (e.g.,  an  interaction  composed  of the  exchange  of  communicative  acts). Social  commitments and social  claims are  types  of  social  moments. Social relators are relators composed of one or more pairs of social commitments  and  social  claims  [25].  As  with  all  relators, social relators are founded in particular events. What 'counts as'  the  founding  event  of  a  social  relator,  as  well  as  the social responsibility and claims entailed by that social relator,  depends  on  a  normative  description  valid  in  that social  context.  For  example,  a  particular  constitution  can define the responsibility and claims entailed by the marriage relator type, and that a particular speech act (e.g., 'I hereby declare  you  husband  and  wife')  uttered  by  a  Judge  in  a specific context (e.g., in the presence  of witnesses) is sufficient for the creation of a relator of that type.

As an additional example, suppose that John rents a car at a  car  rental  office.  When  signing  a  business  contract,  John performs a communicative act (a promise). This act creates a commitment (a social commitment towards that organization)  to  return  the  car  in  a  certain  state.  It  also creates  a  social  claim  of  the  rental  car  office  towards  John with respect to that particular propositional content. Commitments and claims always form a pair that refers to a unique propositional content. Commitments are classified in open and closed. In an open  commitment , the agents responsible for fulfilling the commitment are free to define how  they  will  do  this.  In  a closed  commitment ,  the  agent must fulfill the commitment by performing an action that is an instance of a plan defined by another agent [24].

## IV. A COMMITMENT-BASED SERVICE ONTOLOGY

UFO-S is  a  commitment-based  service  ontology  whose conceptualization is based on the establishment and fulfillment  of  commitments  and  claims  between service participants (used  to  refer  to  both  service  provider  and service customer) along the service life-cycle. In this paper, we focus on the three main phases of the service life-cycle, namely:  (i)  service  offer,  when  a  service  is  presented  and made available to a target customer community, (ii) service negotiation,  when  provider  and  customer(s)  negotiate  in order  to  establish  an  agreement  about  specific  aspects  that drive  the  service  delivery,  and  (iii)  service  delivery,  when actions are performed in order to fulfill a service agreement. Despite their relevance to certain areas of investigation (such as services marketing), we consider all service-related actions  that  occur  before  service  offer  and  after  service delivery as outside the scope of this paper.

In order to represent UFO-S, we employ OntoUML [12], an UML profile that incorporate the foundational distinctions in  UFO-A  and  UFO-B.  Table  I  presents  the  OntoUML stereotypes used in this paper.

TABLE I. A SUBSET OF ONTOUML STEREOTYPES

| Stereotype     | Corresponding Concept in UFO   |
|----------------|--------------------------------|
| <<category>>   | Category                       |
| <<kind>>       | Kind                           |
| <<collective>> | Collective Universal           |
| <<rolemixin>>  | Role Mixin                     |
| <<role>>       | Role                           |
| <<mode>>       | Mode Universal                 |
| <<relator>>    | Relator Universal              |
| <<event>>      | Event Universal                |

In addition to employing OntoUML to represent UFO-S, we  further  ground  UFO-S  with  respect  to  the  social  and intentional concepts of UFO-C.

## A. Service Offer

Figure  5  shows  an  OntoUML  class  diagram  with  the main  concepts  and  relations  involved  in  a  service  offer, according  to  UFO-S.  A service  offer event  results  in  the establishment of a service offering between a service provider and a target customer  community . A  service offering is composed of service offering commitments from the service provider towards the target customer community and the corresponding service offering claims from the target community towards the service provider.

Figure 5. Service Offer

[FIGURE]

What 'counts as' a service offer (i.e., which actions are service offers) depends ultimately on the (social) context in which services are offered; a service offer could thus be the registration of a service provider organization in a chamber of commerce, service advertisements, face-to-face communication,  etc.  The  context  will  also  determine  the kinds of commitments that are established and the consequences that arise from a failure to fulfill such commitments.  For  example,  in  some  legal  systems,  it  is unlawful  for  an  organization  that  has  offered  a  service  to refuse arbitrarily to  provide  the service to a particular customer  in  case  no  legitimate  business  reason  is  provided (in order to rule out arbitrary discrimination).

The set of statements (content) associated to the offering commitments  (and  corresponding  claims)  depends  on  the particular service business model, and, therefore, can refer to several different elements, such as conditions and requirements for providing the service, types of actions to be performed  in  the  scope  of  service  delivery,  constraints, required  customer's  commitments  (such  as  payment),  etc. Such elements may be described in service offering descriptions (such  as  folders,  registration  documents  in  a chamber of commerce, artifacts in a service registry, etc.).

Take as example the case of a car rental service. When this service is offered by a particular car rental office called Highway (e.g., through advertisements), the car rental office plays the role of a service provider. It commits, under certain conditions, to grant  temporary  use  of  a  vehicle  to  the customer.  Examples  of  such  conditions  include  minimum period of rental, car availability, qualifications and properties of  the  renter  (e.g.,  should  be  a  registered  driver  older  than 21),  expected  payment  guarantees,  minimal  rental  period, etc. The members of the target community are entitled to rent a car if all conditions are fulfilled.

What is established in a service offering also determines the  level  of  flexibility  for  a  subsequent  service  negotiation phase, in which a particular service customer and a service provider establish a particular service agreement. Because of that, offering  commitments are  in  fact  meta-commitments [35]  (i.e.,  they  are  commitments  to  accept  commitments), because  they  refer  to  commitments  that  can  be  established later during the negotiation phase and that do not yet exist as a result of a service offer alone.

Agent is a category that represents the essential properties of any type of agentive substantial, such as person, organization,  or  software  agent,  which  may  have  distinct principles of identity. Service provider is the role played by agents  when  these  agents  commit  themselves  to  a  target customer  community  by  a  set  of  offering  commitments.  In terms of UFO, service provider is a role mixin, since it can be instantiated by agents of different kinds, e.g., persons and organizations. Target customer community is a collective that refers to the group of agents that constitute the community to which  the  service  is  being  offered.  The  community  has  an intensional principle of identity, in the sense that agents can enter or leave the community without altering the community's  identity.  The  intensional  criteria  for  defining the target customer community are included in the content of the service offering. This may range from offerings with no restrictions to strictly targeted service offerings.

The target  customer is  the  role  played  by  agents  when they become members of a target customer community and, as consequence,  have  claims  for  the  fulfillment of the commitments  established  by  the  agent  playing  the  role  of service provider. A service offering is  the  social relator that arises from the service offer event, and that can be described in service  offering  descriptions ,  i.e.,  normative  descriptions in  UFO-C.  A  service  offering  is  the  aggregate  of  offering commitments and the corresponding claims. Service offering commitments and claims are social moments (in the sense of UFO-C),  i.e.,  offering  commitments  are  intrinsic  moments, which inhere in the meta-committed agent (acting as service provider) and are externally dependent on the target customer community. Offering claims, in turn, are intrinsic moments that inhere in the target customer community and are externally dependent on the meta-committed agent (acting as service provider).

## B. Service Negotiation

Figure  6  shows  an  OntoUML  class  diagram  with  the main concepts and relations involved in service negotiation, according  to  UFO-S.  Once  a  service  is  offered,  service negotiation  may  occur.  In  general,  service  negotiation  is motivated by the interest of a target customer in the service offering, considering its contents (including the conditions to be satisfied by the service customer in the case it should hire the service). During service negotiation, service provider and target  customer  interact  in  order  to  establish  an  agreement regarding  their  commitments  and claims  with  respect  to an eventual service delivery.

If  service  negotiation  succeeds,  a service  agreement is established, and the service provider starts to play the role of hired  service  provider ,  while  the target  customer starts  to play the role of service customer .  Like a service offering, a service agreement is composed of commitments and claims. However, differently from the service offering, in a service agreement service customers may also establish commitments to service providers (e.g., the commitment to pay).  Service  agreement  involves not  only  commitments from the hired service provider towards the service customer, but may also involve commitments from the service customer towards the hired service provider. Thus, these two participants become co-responsible for the service delivery.

Service agreement should conform to what was previously established in the corresponding service offering. This  is  exactly  the  relation  between  the  meta-commitments in  the  offering  and  the  commitments  in  the  agreement.  An agreement X conforms  to  an  offering Y if  for  every  metacommitment mc in Y , there is a commitment c in X such that: any  situation  which  satisfies  the  propositional  content  of c satisfies the propositional content of mc (and mutatis mutandis for claims).

As in the case of service offer,  what  is  agreed between the parties (commitments and claims of both hired provider and service customer) depends on the context of the service agreement,  as  well  as  on  the  particular  service  business model, and, therefore, can refer to several different elements. These  elements  may  be  described  in service  agreement descriptions (such as a service contract)

Returning  to  the  case  of  the  car  rental  service,  when John, a particular target customer, goes to the Highway car rental office and rents a car, he becomes a service customer, whereas Highway acts as a hired service provider. John and Highway commit themselves to perform some actions and to respect  certain  conditions.  Examples  of  these  conditions include amount  to be paid per day, period of rental, conditions  of  the  vehicle  and  so  on.  These  conditions  are registered in a contract.

Figure 6. Service Negotiation

[FIGURE]

In terms of UFO-C, service negotiation is an interaction involving  the  participations  of  the  service  provider  and  the target customers. When  service negotiation (an event ) succeeds, this event is the foundation for a service agreement (a relator ). Hired provider and service customer commitments and claims are social moments . Hired provider commitments and claims are intrinsic moments that inhere in a  hired  service  provider  and  are  externally  dependent  on  a service customer. Service customer commitments and claims are intrinsic moments that inhere in a service customer and are externally dependent on a hired service provider.

In  a  manner  analogous  to  how  a  service  offering  (as  a social relator) mediates the relation between service provider and target service customers by aggregating offering commitments and claims, a service agreement mediates the relation between hired service provider and service customers  by  being  a  social  relator  composed  by  the hired provider commitments and claims and the service customer commitments and claims .

The role of hired service provider is played by an agent A , when this agent commits itself to an agent B (playing the role of service customer) to perform actions or to achieve the results determined in the service agreement. This means that service agreement includes a delegation relation [24]: when establishing a service agreement, agent B who plays the role of service customer, delegates a goal/plan to the agent A who plays  the  role  of  hired  service  provider.  Thus,  claims  of B towards A ,  and  commitments  of A towards B are  created, since A has  committed  to  pursue  the  delegated  goal  or  to execute  the  delegated  plan.  Depending  on  the  business service model, this delegation may be open or closed [24]. In open delegation, the hired service provider is free to determine how a commitment is to be fulfilled, which may include  further  delegation  (common  in  service  systems  and economic networks). On the other hand, in closed delegation , the hired service provider commits to the execution of a pre-defined plan (i.e., instantiating an agreed action universal).

When  agent B delegates  a  goal/plan  to  agent A , B becomes (at some level) dependent on A . Thus, before hiring a  service  (and,  therefore,  establishing  a  delegation),  the customer typically makes an analysis of feasibility, not only associated  to  monetary  aspects,  but  also  to  aspects  such  as dependency,  rights,  and  commitments  to  be  established. Considering  the  notion  of  co-responsibility  arisen  by  the mutual commitments, the hired service provider also depends on the service customers for the fulfillment of their own commitments (e.g., a consultancy firm needs access to information from customers in order to provide its services). Thus, in  the  context  of  a  service  agreement,  the  agent  who plays the role of hired service provider ( A ) is also dependent on the agent who plays the role of service customer ( B ).

## C. Service Delivery

Service delivery concerns the execution of actions aimed at  fulfilling  the  commitments  established  in  the  service agreement. A service is successfully delivered if the actions are performed in such a way that their results (and also the way they are performed) fulfill the service agreement.

Figure  7  shows  an  OntoUML  class  diagram  presenting the main concepts and relations involved in service delivery according  to  UFO-S. Service  delivery is  a  complex  action, which  is  composed  by  several  actions,  including  actions performed only by the hired service provider ( hired provider actions ),  actions  performed  only  by  the  service  customer ( customer  actions ),  and  actions  performed  by  both  in  an interaction ( hired provider-customer interaction ). All of these actions are motivated by the commitments established in  service  agreement,  between  the  hired  provider  and  the service customer. Depending on the business service model, other  agents  can  also  perform  actions.  For  instance,  the service provider can delegate some actions to a third-party. These actions are also  part  of  the  service  delivery  process, although they are not explicitly represented in Figure 7.

Figure 7. Service Delivery.

[FIGURE]

## V. APPLYING UFO-S TO VARIOUS PERSPECTIVES ON SERVICES

In  this  section,  we  evaluate  UFO-S  by  showing  how  it explains and relates various service perspectives. We cluster these perspectives according to their main characteristics.

## A. Service as Co-Creation of Value

The literature on services often identifies the creation of value  as  the  'raison  d'être'  for  services,  i.e.,  services  exist for  service  participants  to  benefit  or  to  extract  value  from their  participation.  Maglio  and  Spohrer  [4],  for  example, have characterized service systems as 'dynamic configurations  of  resources  capable  of  providing  benefit  to other service systems', forming dynamic network structures '(1)  capable of improving  the  state  of  another  system through sharing or applying its resources[...] and (2) capable of improving its own state by acquiring external resources' [3]. Vargo and Lusch have pushed this notion to the extreme, characterizing  services  as  the  fundamental  basis  of  value creation through exchange ('all economies are service economies')  [2].  Spohrer  et  al.  [3]  have  explained  that 'service systems engage in three main activities in order to co-create value: (1) proposing value, (2) accepting a proposal, and (3) realizing the proposal.'

In  UFO-S, agents become service providers and service customers  by  participating  in  intentional  actions  (service offer,  and  service  negotiation).    According  to  UFO-C,  all actions are motivated by an agent's goals and beliefs, even if the  result  of  the  actions  does  not  match  these  goals.  Thus, entering into service commitments is motivated by the goals of  service  providers  and  service  customers,  and  the  beliefs they hold towards service commitments, e.g., that performing a service offer or establishing a service agreement will lead to benefits. However, entering into such commitments cannot be said to guarantee the accomplishment of the motivating goals, e.g., because agents may fail to fulfill their commitments. Even in the case when agents fulfill  their  commitments, they still  may not achieve the  goals  that  led  them  to  enter  into  such  commitments, unless in the trivial case in which the satisfaction of goals is entailed by the fulfillment of commitments.

Whether or not value is produced in the service life-cycle is  in  fact  a  subjective  notion,  which  depends  on  how  the service  participants  assess  their  participations,  i.e.,  whether they  ascribe  to  the  experience  in  the  service  life  cycle  a positive assessment. In this we agree with Vargo and Lusch when  they  discuss  that 'value is  always  uniquely  and phenomenologically determined by the beneficiary' and that 'value is idiosyncratic, experiential, contextual, and meaning laden.'  As  such,  value  cannot  be  (directly)  transferred  or exchanged.  Thus  we  refrain  from  using  terminology  that would  suggest  otherwise  such  as  'transfers  of  value'  and 'service value exchange'. This terminology was used initially by Ferrario and Guarino in [14], but then abandoned in  [15],  when  they  say  that  'it  is  service,  not  value  that  is exchanged, because value is subjective'. This is not to  say that there are no objective outcomes or effects of the actions performed in order to fulfill service commitments. However, the value ascribed to these actions and the situations that are brought about by these actions are subjective.

## B. Service as Capabilities and Application of Competences

Many authors have characterized services by focusing on the capability of providers to produce benefits to customers (e.g.,  [5][6])  or  on  the application  of  such  capabilities (competences) of one party in benefit of another party [2].

This  is  accounted  for  in  UFO-S  through  the  notion  of dispositions  and  their  manifestations  through  events.  We regard  a  capability  or  competence  as  a  disposition  of  an agent,  be  it  human  or  organizational,  which  under  certain conditions  is  manifested  in  actions,  such  as  those  in  the service  life-cycle.  By  combining  this  explanation  with  the notion of commitment, UFO-S reveals an important distinction, namely that between: (i) possessing a capability to perform certain actions or to produce certain outcome, i.e., bearing a certain disposition, and (ii) employing capabilities in  order  to  fulfill  social  commitments,  i.e.,  manifesting  the disposition motivated by social commitments. The former is not sufficient for services, since the capability of an organization of washing cars (cf. (i)) does not automatically make  it  a  car  wash  service  provider.  Even  an  organization that is not capable of washing cars may still offer a car wash service,  delegating  the actual car  washing to a party that is capable  of  doing  it.  Thus,  the  capability  manifested  by  the provider is not that of car washing, but that of delegating it to a capable party [36]. In any case, the picture is only complete by considering the commitments that influence the manifestation of dispositions (cf. (ii)).

Usually in service agreements not only providers but also customers  commit  themselves  to  manifesting  capabilities under specific conditions. For example, while an online shop commits itself  to  manifest  its  capability  of  shipping  goods, the customer commits itself to manifesting his capability of paying for the purchased goods, providing accurate information for delivery, ensuring that someone is present at the  delivery  address  to  receive  the  goods  during  delivery hours, etc. This view emphasizes the aspect of co-production of services that was  discussed  in  the original  ServiceDominant  logic  article  [37]  and  further  shows  that  the asymmetry in the service provider/service customer relation cannot be explained solely by the application of competences of one party on the behalf of another, because the customer also employs its competences to the benefit of the provider. In order to account for the asymmetry, we need to consider the  life-cycle  of  (meta-)commitments  (service  offering  and service agreement) as discussed in section IV of this article.

## C. Service as Interaction

The joint participation of service customers and providers has been addressed by some authors who emphasize interactions in the characterization of services. For example, Quartel et al. [1] propose that at a high-level of abstraction, a service can be considered as a single  interaction between  a 'service user' and a 'provider'. They further propose that at a lower level of abstraction, a service can be regarded as 'as multiple  related  interactions  between  a  service  user  and provider.'  This  shows  that  interactions  are  an  important aspect of service delivery. Nevertheless, as we have discussed  in  the  example  of  the  insurance  service,  it  is possible  that  there  is  no  interaction  during  service  delivery and  still  the  service  is  provided,  due  to  existence  of  the service  agreement.  Further,  service  delivery  includes  all actions caused by the intention to fulfill a service agreement, including  those  referred  to  in  the  content  of  the  service agreement in the case of closed delegation. As we discussed in  Section  IV,  some  of  these  actions  may  involve  the participation  of  service  provider  and  service  customer  (and are thus interactions), and some may involve only a service provider, or a service customer or a third-party. Depending on  the  particular  service  model,  service  agreements  may make reference to both interaction types and particular action types. For example, in the case of the car wash service, the service agreement  may  include  that the car should be vacuum  cleaned,  specifying  thus  a  type  of  action  to  be performed during service delivery. While the view defended in  UFO-S  encompasses  that  of  service  as  interaction,  we conclude that services should not be reduced only to interactions, and that a broad account must also include the notion of commitments. UFO-S also identifies that interactions  occur  in  other  phases  of  the  service  lifecycle, e.g., when a service agreement is negotiated.

## D. Technical Services

At the technical level, the notion of service has been used and defended  for  over  three  decades.  In  [38],  for  example, service is characterized as observable behavior, in the context  of  data  communication  protocols.  In  that  view,  a service specification does not reveal any internal structure of the  service  provider,  but  it  defines  the  behavior  of  the provider as it can be observed by users [1][38]. This notion can be explained in UFO-S, since it is possible to establish service agreements with no reference to how the commitments will be fulfilled, by using open delegation.

In  a  technical  service-oriented architecture (such as that discussed in [7]), what counts as a service offer is typically the  publication  or  registration  of  a  service  description,  or definition of a contract (in the sense of [39]). In this case, the service offering description is often reduced to descriptions of operations or sets of operations that are typically characterized by a pair of interaction types and constraints on them (possibly relating several operations). If operations are considered units of service delivery, then an operation invocation  can  count  as  (an  implicit  and  trivial)  service negotiation,  with  the  establishment  of  an  agreement  whose type is pre-defined in the service offer. In any case, whether service negotiation is implicit, explicit, online or offline, the notion of commitment is instrumental in explaining both the semantics of service description publication and the establishment of Service-Level Agreements (service agreements in UFO-S).

Further, beyond the technical perspective, we believe in line with [16] that service commitments can support us in the relation between the business and the technical perspectives. This is because commitments established between organizational and human agents affects those established at the  technical  level.  By  offering  an  interface  through  which certain capabilities are leveraged, an operation or a software application  should  be  driven  by  a  set  of  aspects  such  as response time, the semantics of data, and possibly the steps followed by the operation / application in order  to  produce the expected outcome. In contrast, the agent that accesses the operation or the application should respect a set of constraints in order to get the expected result. These aspects can  be  described  in  terms  of  commitments,  and  can  be established at business level, which constrain the implementations as services in operations or applications.

## VI. RELATED WORK

OWL-S [40] and WSMO [41] are Semantic Web Service ontologies that focus mainly on technological aspects and are usually applied for automating tasks such as service discovery  and  composition  [42].  These  ontologies  are  not based on foundational ontologies and none of them addresses the notion of commitments. Further, both are focused on the description of  technical  services  while  UFO-S  aims  instead at explicating service phenomena in order to support (offline) meaning  negotiation.  Finally,  we  should  note  that  OWL-S and  WSMO are built on semantic  web  languages that  give precedence to computational tractability over expressiveness. As  a  consequence,  these  ontologies  are  less  suitable  for meaning negotiation.

The Open Group Service-Oriented Architecture Ontology aims to aid understanding in the domain of serviceoriented  architecture,  and  potentially  be  a  basis  for  modeldriven implementation [37]. In that ontology, the concept of 'service' is defined as a logical representation of a repeatable activity that has a specified outcome. As we have discussed earlier, this view fails to address the commitment aspects of services. Although the notion of service contract is addressed in this ontology it is considered optional, and the content of contracts is not analyzed in details. No distinction between service offer and service agreement is made. Finally, the Open Group Service-Oriented Architecture Ontology  avoids  defining  concepts  such  as  consumer  and provider as core concepts [37], although it mention that these terms may be used in service contracts. This is a consequence  of  their  view  on  services  that,  as  we  have argued  in  section  V.B,  cannot  account  for  the  asymmetry involved in service provider-customer relations.

The Service Ontology proposed [42] is structured in such way that the core modules span several application domains, such as healthcare, and automotive, and are also grounded by the upper level model, which consists of a concise foundational ontology (DOLCE [21]). By that, we consider this  ontology  as  core  reference  ontology.  The  Core  Service Description  module  is  one  of  the  most  important  core modules. It discusses general aspects such as service description,  service  provider,  and  service  consumer.  This module  presents  two  central  notions:  service  and  service description.  The  authors remark  that this distinction is important, because in scenarios such as service marketplace the  service  descriptions  are  managed  instead  of  the  service itself,  since  a  service  is  defined  as  an  event  (in  terms  of DOLCE).  As  advocated  in  UFO-S,  the  notion  of  service should  be  characterized  even  if  no  event,  interaction,  or activity is executed. The notion of commitment as presented in UFO-S as social relators that can be described in service descriptions (including service offering descriptions  and service  agreement  descriptions)  may  be  useful  to  detail  the notion of service description in the Service Ontology.

The Goal-Based Service Ontology (GSO) [18] is a core reference ontology grounded in the same foundational ontology (UFO) of UFO-S. Thus, we can say that both share the same grounding. However, GSO focuses on the concept of  goal  in  order  to  discuss  the  notion  of  service.  In  GSO, service is as a temporal entity related to the commitment that a service provider will perform a task on behalf of a service client  whose  outcome  satisfies  a  service  client's  goal  [18]. The notion of commitments addressed in GSO lacks further discussions. For example, GSO does not discuss the kinds of commitments and how these kinds of commitments influence the definition of the agents' roles along the service life-cycle. As a consequence, in GSO, it is not possible to discuss the notion of target service customer, and hired service provider, for example. Also, in the service definition of GSO, only the provider  is  committed  to  achieving  the  goal.  However, service  relationships  are  usually  characterized  by  mutual commitments, since the service client is also committed.

Ferrario  and  Guarino  in  [14][15]  present  an  ontological analysis of service systems that is also based on the notion of commitments. The most salient differences between UFO-S and such previous works are: (i) the adoption of OntoUML, and  (ii)  the  grounding  in  UFO  (instead  of  DOLCE).  With respect to the former, OntoUML offers well-founded modeling capabilities that are associated to a number of tools

(e.g.,  model verification and simulation [43] and generation of  OWL  implementations  [44]).  Regarding  the  latter,  we highlight  the  use  of  the  social  and  intentional  distinctions underlying UFO-C, and that, besides offering a hierarchy of individuals,  UFO  (in  contrast  to  DOLCE)  also  offers  a hierarchy of universals, which contributes, among others, to the  definition  of  types  required  in  our  account  (e.g.  role mixins, relator universals). Further work is however necessary to investigate the relationship  between  UFO relators and DOLCE states.

## VII. FINAL CONSIDERATIONS

This  work  presented  the  definition  of  a  foundation  for Service Computing and Service Science with a core reference  ontology  for  services  called  UFO-S.  UFO-S  is grounded in a foundational ontology that includes social and intentional concepts that form the basis for our account of the social  relations  established  throughout  the  service  lifecycle. UFO-S accounts for the agent's intentionality with respect to the actions they perform by entering into and aiming to fulfill their social commitments.

We have shown that UFO-S is able to explain a number of  perspectives  on  services,  including  those  that  emphasize services as value co-creation, services as capabilities, services as application of competences, services as interactions and, finally, services as a technical notion.

In  order  to  relate  the  various  perspectives,  we  have refrained  from  settling  on  a  specific  definition  for  the  term 'service', understanding that the term is laden with different meanings  (e.g., differently from  the approach  taken in [14][15]). Our  approach  addresses the elements of the phenomena underlying services, providing a foundation that can  be  used  to  articulate  the  semantics  of  service-related terminology. With that we hope not to incite the terminological debate, which in our opinion should not play a dominant role in the development of solid foundations for Service Science and Services Computing.

We have argued that the notion of service commitments can  span  the  business  and  technical  perspectives,  with  the potential of promoting a much-needed conceptual integration of business and IT service aspects. We  believe this observation  can  guide  our  future  work  on  well-founded modeling of  service-oriented  enterprise  architectures.  Thus, we intend to perform an ontological analysis of ArchiMate focusing  on  the  service  construct.  This  would  contribute  to the agenda we have been pursuing in the last decade towards well-founded enterprise modeling [26][27] [28][29].

We have focused on a core fragment of the service life cycle,  leaving  marketing-related  phases  (pre-service  offer and  post-service  delivery)  outside  the  scope  of  this  paper. Future work could expand on that in order to provide a more detailed  account  for  the  origin  of  value  propositions  and  to further  explicate  the  subjective  value  experience  aspects. Also  is  necessary  to  account  for  issues  regarding  resource allocation, usage and consumption in service delivery.

Our  use of the well-founded OntoUML  profile  for modeling  UFO-S  leverages  the  conceptual  distinctions  in UFO  as  well  as  the  tool  support  already  developed  for OntoUML;  This  includes  formal  verification  of  the  model

(guaranteeing  that  the  models  put  forth  here  are  compliant with  the  UFO  ontological  constraints),  validation  of  the model  via visual simulation (relying  on  an  OntoUML infrastructure developed on top of the Alloy Analyzer [43]) as  well  as  the  systematic  implementation  of  UFO-S  in computational level languages such as OWL [44].

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research is funded by the Brazilian Research Agencies CAPES/CNPq  (402991/2012-5),  FAPES/CNPq  (PRONEX 52272362/11), FAPES (59971509/12) and CNPq (483383/2010-4, 310634/2011-3, and 311578/2011-0).

## REFERENCES

- [1] D. A. C. Quartel, M. W. A. Steen, S. Pokraev, and M. J. van Sinderen, 'COSMO:  A  conceptual framework for service modelling and refinement,' Information Systems Frontiers , vol. 9, no. 2-3, pp. 225244, 2007.
- [2] S. L. Vargo and R. L. Lusch, 'Evolving to a new dominant logic for marketing,' Journalof Marketing , vol. 68, pp. 1-17, 2004.
- [3] J.  Spohrer,  S.  L.  Vargo,  N.  Caswell,  and  P.  P.  Maglio,  'The  service system  is  the  basic  abstraction  of  service  science,'  in 41st  Annual Hawaii  International  Conference  on  System  Sciences  HICSS ,  2008, vol. 7, pp. 104-104.
- [4] P.  P.  Maglio  and  J.  Spohrer,  'Fundamentals  of  Service  Science,' Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 1820, 2008.
- [5] 'Reference  Model  for  Service  Oriented  Architecture  1.0:  OASIS Standard.' OASIS, pp. 1-31, 2006.
- [6] T.  Ruokolainen,  'A  Model-Driven  Approach  to  Service  Ecosystem Engineering,' University of Helsinki, 2013.
- [7] W3C,  'Web  services  architecture  W3C:  Working  Group  Note  11,' 2004. [Online]. Available: http://www.w3.org/TR/ws-arch/.
- [8] 'Archimate 2.0 Specification: Technical Standard.' The Open Group, Berkshire, UK, 2012.
- [9] S. Alter, 'Service System Fundamentals: Work System, Value Chain, and Life Cycle,' IBM Systems Journal , vol. 47.1, pp. 71-85, 2008.
- [10] D.  Oberle, Semantic  Management  of  Middleware .  Berlin:  SpringerVerlag, 2006.
- [11] A.  Scherp,  C.  Saathoff,  T.  Franz,  and  S.  Staab,  'Designing  core ontologies,' Applied Ontology , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 177-221, 2011.
- [12] G.  Guizzardi,  'Ontological  Foundations  for  Structural  Conceptual Models,' University of Twente, 2005.
- [13] G.  Guizzardi,  R.  A.  Falbo,  and  R.  S.  S.  Guizzardi,  'Grounding software  domain  ontologies  in  the  Unified  Foundational  Ontology (UFO): the case of the ODE  software process ontology,' in Proceedings  of  the  XI  Iberoamerican  Workshop  on  Requirements Engineering and Software Environments , 2008, pp. 244-251.
- [14] R. Ferrario and N. Guarino, 'Towards an Ontological Foundation for Services  Science,'  in First  Future  Internet  Symposium  (FIS) ,  2008, vol. Vol. 5468, pp. 152-169.
- [15] R. Ferrario and N. Guarino, 'Commitment-based Modeling of Service Systems,' in Third International Conference, IESS , 2012, pp.170-185.
- [16] M.  P.  Singh,  A.  K.  Chopra,  and  N.  Desai,  'Commitment-Based Service-Oriented Architecture' Computer , vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 72-79, 2009.
- [17] W. Mingming and H. Youbei, 'Design and Implementation of Service Commitment,' in International Conference on Service Sciences ICSS , 2010, pp. 388-391.
- [18] L. O. B. S. Santos, G. Guizzardi, R. S. S. Guizzardi, E. G. da Silva, L. F.  Pires,  and  M.  Van  Sinderen,  'GSO:  Designing  a  Well-Founded Service Ontology to Support Dynamic Service Discovery and Composition,'  in 13th Enterprise Distributed  Object  Computing Conference Workshops , 2009, pp. 35-44.
- [19] J. O'Sullivan, 'Towards a Precise Understanding of Service Properties,' Queensland University of Technology, 2006.
- [20] M. Dumas, J. O'Sullivan, M. Hervizadeh, D. Edmond, and A. H. M. Ter Hofstede, 'Towards a Semantic Framework for Service Description,' in IFIP  TC2WG26  Ninth  Working  Conference  on
21. Database  Semantics  Semantic  Issues  in  ECommerce  Systems ,  2001, pp. 277-291.
- [21] O.  A.  Masolo  C.,  Borgo  S.,  Gangemi  A.,  Guarino  N.,  'WonderWeb DeliverableD18. Ontology Library,' Padova-Italy, 2003.
- [22] N.  Guarino  and  C.  Welty,  'Evaluating  ontological  decisions  with OntoClean,' Communications of the ACM , v. 45, no. 2,p. 61-65, 2002.
- [23] B. Heller and H. Herre, 'Ontological Categories in GOL' Axiomathes, Kluwer Academic Publishers , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 57-76, 2004.
- [24] R. S. S. Guizzardi, 'Agent-Oriented Constructivist Knowledge Management,' University of Twente, 2006.
- [25] A.  C.  O.  Bringuente,  R.  A.  Falbo,  and  G.  Guizzardi,  'Using  a Foundational Ontology for Reengineering a Software Process Ontology,' Journal of Information and Data Management , vol. 2, pp. 511-526, 2011.
- [26] P.  S.  Santos  Jr.,  J.  P.  A.  Almeida,  and  G.  Guizzardi,  'An  ontologybased analysis and semantics for organizational structure modeling in the ARIS method,' Information Systems (Oxford) , pp. 690-708, 2012.
- [27] C. Azevedo, J. P. A. Almeida, M. J. Van Sinderen, D. Quartel, and G. Guizzardi, 'An Ontology-Based Semantics for the Motivation Extension to ArchiMate,' in 15th IEEE International Conference on Enterprise Computing (EDOC) , 2011, Helsinki, Finland., pp. 25-34.
- [28] J.  P.  A.  Almeida  and  G.  Guizzardi, 'An Ontological Analysis of the Notion of Community in the RM-ODP  Enterprise Language,' Computer Standards &amp; Interfaces , vol. 34, pp. 1, 2012.
- [29] J.  P.  A.  Almeida,  G.  Guizzardi,  and  P.  S.  Santos  Jr.,  'Applying  and Extending  a Semantic  Foundation  for Role-Related  Concepts  in Enterprise Modelling,' Enterprise Information Systems (Print) , vol. 3, pp. 253-277, 2009.
- [30] J. Heil, From an Ontological Point of View . Oxford University Press, USA, 2005.
- [31] S. Mumford, Dispositions . Oxford University Press, 2003.
- [32] G.  Guizzardi,  'Agents  Roles,  Qua  Individuals  and  The  Counting Problem,' Software  Engineering  of  Multi-Agent  Systems ,  vol.  4,  pp. 143-160, 2005.
- [33] R. Ferrario and A. Oltramari, 'Towards a Computational Ontology of the  Mind,'  in 3rd  International  Conference  on  Formal  Ontology  in Information System (FOIS) , 2004.
- [34] J.  R.  Searle, Mind,  Language  and  Society:  Philosophy  In  The  Real World . Basic Books, 2000, p. 626.
- [35] C. Castelfranchi, 'Commitments: From Individual Intentions to Groups and Organizations,' in Proceedings of the First International Conference on Multiagent Systems , 1995, pp. 41-48.
- [36] R. S. S. Guizzardi and G. Guizzardi, 'Ontology-Based Transformation Framework  from  Tropos  to  AORML,' In Social Modeling  for Requirements  Engineering.  Cooperative  Information  Systems  Series , P. Giorgini, N. Maiden, J. Mylopoulos, and E. Yu, Eds. Boston: MIT Press., 2010.
- [37] 'Service-Oriented Architecture Ontology.' The Open Group, 2009.
- [38] C. Vissers and L. Logrippo, 'The importance of the service concept in the design of data communication protocols', Protocol Specification, Testing and Verification , vol. V, pp. 3-17, 1986.
- [39] B. Meyer, 'Applying 'Design by Contract'', Computer ,  vol.  25,  no. 10, pp. 40-51, 1992.
- [40] D. Martin, M. Burstein, J. H. O. Lassila, D. McDermott, and E. Al., 'OWL-S: Semantic markup for web services: W3C Member Submission 22.,' 2004. [Online]. Available: http://www.w3.org/Submission/OWL-S/.
- [41] J. de Bruijn, C. Bussler, J. Domingue, D. Fensel, M. Hepp, M. Kifer, B. König-Ries, J. Kopecky, R. Lara, E. Oren, A. Polleres, J. SciCluna, and M. Stollberg, 'Web Service Modeling Ontol ogy (WSMO). Final Draft.,' 2006. [Online]. Available: http://www.wsmo.org/TR/d2/v1.3/.
- [42] D.  Oberle,  N.  Bhatti,  S.  Brockmans,  and  C.  Janiesch,  'Countering service information challenges in the internet of services.,' Journal of Business &amp; Information System Engineering (BISE) , vol. 5, 2009.
- [43] A. B. Benevides, G. Guizzardi, B. F. B. Braga, and J. P. A. . Almeida, 'Validating  Modal  Aspects  of  OntoUML  Conceptual  Models  Using Automatically Generated Visual World Structures,' Journal of Universal Computer Science (Print) , vol. 16, pp. 2904-2933, 2011.
- [44] V. Zamborlini and G. Guizzardi, 'On the Representation of Temporally Changing Information in OWL,' in Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference Workshops (EDOCW) - VORTE , 2010, pp.283-292.
