## Decision-Making in Knowledge-intensive Processes: The Case of Value Ascription and Goal Processing

Pedro H. Piccoli Richetti 1( &amp; ) , Fernanda Araujo Bai ã o 2 , and Maria Luiza M. Campos 1

1 Graduate Program in Informatics, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro,

Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

pedro.richetti@ufrj.br, mluiza@ppgi.ufrj.br 2 Ponti fi cal Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil fbaiao@puc-rio.br

Abstract. Knowledge-intensive Processes (KiPs) are a range of business processes which are rather unpredictable, highly variable, and very dependent on human knowledge and collaboration. Despite the recent efforts to provide comprehensive support for KiP management, there are still few discussions about how human aspects influence process execution. For example, in a disaster management KiP, why someone decides to take action when the action itself may put their own life at stake? This work aims to provide an ontological background for properly understanding human decision-making actions by analyzing cognitive states of agents participating in a KiP. We introduce a novel perspective of decisions seen as value and risk experiences, and a formal characterization of agents ' beliefs in a goal processing framework, which paves the way for precisely and systematically explaining decision-making towards process goals. We claim that these value-oriented conceptual models are capable of describing the rationale of decision-making in KiPs in terms of value and risk ascriptions and by a set of belief types that supports goal processing. In a practical example, the proposed conceptual models were applied in the analysis of a real-life KiP instance from the air traf fi c control domain.

Knowledge-intensive Process Goal Processing Value Ascription

Keywords:  

## 1 Introduction

Business processes represent core assets of every organization and, as such, need to be managed so as to enable stakeholders to control and guide their evolution. As stated by Dumas et al. [1], the execution of a process leads to several outcomes that should deliver some sort of value to the actors involved in the process. Traditional control-flow oriented -or highly automated -processes typically require less effort to be understood, managed and improved, since each step of these processes can be prede fi ned due to their intrinsic predictability and low variability. However, there exists a range of processes, so called Knowledge-intensive Processes (KiPs), that are rather unpredictable, highly variable, and very dependent on human knowledge and collaboration [2]. KiPs are present in several domains, such as in customer support services, air traf fi c control, design of new products or services, marketing campaigns planning, data quality management, IT governance and strategic planning, disaster management, criminal investigations and healthcare diagnosis [2, 3]. Human agents, and particularly their mental states inhered in them are core elements of KiPs, since they characterize the driving mechanisms for agents to make decisions and take action. Although there exist several works on characterization and management of KiPs [2, 4 -7], there are still scarce discussions in the literature on how agents get motivated and decide to act when the process demands ad-hoc decisions, experienced workers and actions to be planned at runtime.

[FIGURE]

We argue that a precise de fi nition of the cognitive mechanisms that lead agents to participate in a process is of major relevance to explain how agents formulate a proper course of action towards a process goal. Take, as an example, a disaster management process, where the process instance is to save victims from a building on fi re. The process involves coordination of many agents, some of them very specialized, to perform activities such as ' to isolate the area ' , ' to bring resources to extinguish the fi re ' , ' to enter the building and rescue victims ' , and ' to provide medical assistance ' . Each of these activities are planned and executed speci fi cally for the characteristics of the fi re; however, during the execution of some procedures, conditions may change the original course of action (for example, if the building starts to collapse). Consider a fi re fi ghter that decides to face the fi re and enter the building to search for victims. What motivates the agent to put his/her own life at risk and take this action? What mechanisms make the fi re fi ghter decide to act guided by the goal of a process that makes him/her take actions contrary to the natural desire of keeping his/her life safe? In this context, the research question we pursue to answer is: How agents decide to act in order to successfully achieve a goal within a KiP? As we shall claim in this paper, prior to action, agents make decisions among the possible alternatives and then choose the most valuable tasks towards the goals they have previously committed to.

Different notions of value surround business processes contexts. Sales et al. [8] discussed the notions of ethical value, exchange value and use value, being the latter the mostly used in the business literature. Use value is considered a core issue to understand why customers choose a particular product or service and how companies differentiate themselves from their competitors. The notion of use value is relative to one or more experiences (future, current or past) and results from the valuation of such experiences, where a value ascription relationship may take place between an agent and a value object [9]. It is also important to consider the opposite effect of value ascription, that is risk ascription. Risk contemplates future experiences whose chances of happening should be mitigated because their occurrence may imply some kind of loss. Sales et al. [8] proposed that risk shares some similarities with value, such as goaldependency, context-dependency, uncertainty and impact, thus most of what is applied to the use value notion also can be applied to the risk notion.

A goal can be de fi ned as an anticipatory mental representation of a state of affairs that governs and constrains the behavior of an agent towards its realization [10]. Goals drive human desires and intentions that push agents towards actions, as proposed in the seminal BDI framework [11]. Castelfranchi and Paglieri [10] argued that goals are central for understanding human cognition, since a goal is a mental representation with a given use, function, role or application. Thus, the value or risk ascribed by agents to a business process activity depends entirely on the goals the agents have represented in their mind and how the experiences provided by that activity contribute to achieving these goals.

Major theories of motivation emphasize that different aspects of beliefs, values and goals compose a motivational state that precedes decision-making and further action [12]. Thus, we claim that a discussion about the role of value and risk within beliefs and goals in KiPs is needed to properly de fi ne and understand how agents get motivated and decide to act. In this work, as the main contribution, we propose a wellfounded conceptual model to characterize and structure the ontological nature of the relationships between two core concepts: on one side, the mental states of agents participating in a KiP; on the other side, the goals that have to be pursued to lead this processes to a successful state. We argue that this conceptualization should consider value and risk ascriptions within decision-making as crucial concepts to explain why agents take actions in a KiP. To support this proposal, we consider the Goal Processing Theory [10] and the Common Ontology on ValuE and Risk (COVER) [8] in favor of KiP decision-making analysis. The Knowledge-intensive Process Ontology (KiPO) [4] is considered as a reference structural conceptual model for KiPs. All proposed conceptual models are anchored on the Uni fi ed Foundational Ontology (UFO) [13] in order to provide a sound basis for the conceptualizations. UFO has been used to evaluate, re-design and give real-world semantics to domain ontologies by making them more truthful to reality and by making their ontological commitments explicit [14]. UFO has also been chosen as a reference top-level ontology because it provides basic concepts regarding objects and events, as well as social and intentional phenomena, which are needed to properly model the discussed domain. Regarding validation, we report on empirical evidences gathered from a practical example, were the proposed conceptual model has been successfully applied in the analysis of a real-life KiP instance from the air traf fi c control domain.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 presents the background on KiPO, Goal Processing and Value Ascription theories. Section 3 presents the conceptual models we propose to explain how goal processing, value and risk ascription influence decision-making in KiPs. Section 4 presents a case study with a real-life KiP instance from the air traf fi c control domain applying and illustrating the usefulness of our proposed models, and Sect. 5 concludes the paper.

## 2 KiPO, Goal Processing and Value Ascription

## 2.1 The Knowledge-intensive Process Ontology (KiPO)

KiPO is a domain ontology comprising key concepts and relationships that are relevant for understanding, describing and managing a Knowledge-intensive Process [4]. KiPO provides a common, domain-independent understanding of KiPs and, as such, it may be used as a meta-model for structuring KiP concepts. This ontology is anchored on UFO, as each KiPO concept is de fi ned according to UFO constructs, which in turn are described in terms of its metaproperties (sortality, relational dependence, rigidity, among others). It de fi nes the core concepts of a KiP, such as agents, their goals and mental states, Knowledge-intensive Activities (KiAs) the agents perform and the contextual elements involved in KiAs. KiPO argues that a KiP is driven by agents ' intentions towards achieving process goals, and the flow of activities, especially decision-making ones, within a KiP is deeply influenced by intentional moments, such as Beliefs, Desires, Intentions and Perceptions [15].

According to KiPO, an Agent is the one who intentionally commits to make a Decision to solve a Question, being a Decision a special type of KiA. A Question is a Contingency event that triggers a Decision to be made. To perform a Decision, an Agent chooses among several Alternatives, which represent potential Situations that could be achieved (Chosen Alternative) or not (Discarded Alternative). Alternatives satis fi es Propositions, which are assessed as Advantages or Disadvantages according to Criteria considered by the Agent during the assessment. An Alternative may also pose some Risks, which are to be avoided. Regarding Decisions, KiPO demands improvements on its Risk de fi nition, since it considers Risk as a Proposition that impacts on Decision Alternatives. More recently, the work of Sales et al. [8] considered Risk as a special case of Value. Also, both Value and Risk concepts can be ascribed to Experiences (Events) so that they can be evaluated by an Agent to the extent which of these Experiences satisfy or hurt some Goal. This approach allows to explain why Agents decide to choose an Alternative in preference of others by the notion of Value Ascription, which considers a sense of valuation of the intended experiences a Decision may imply. KiPO also de fi nes two types of Goals, namely Process Goal and Activity Goal. A Process Goal is the ultimate objective to be pursued when a KiP is performed and it is expected that it should not change during process execution. An Activity Goal is the Goal to be achieved by the execution of an Activity (being a single Activity or a KiA) that an Agent commits to perform as part of the KiP, and it contributes to achieve a Process Goal. KiPO does not elaborate on how Activity Goals are activated, pursued or chosen in scenarios where decisions about the course of action are ad-hoc or the KiP is subject to contingencies which force existing goals to be dropped or new goals to be added.

## 2.2 Goal Processing

UFO de fi nes a Goal as an internal mental representation of a future expected outcome [13]. As such, its existence depends on an Agent having an Intentional Moment, being a Desire or an Intention towards that Goal. A Desire is one kind of goal bearer, a possible origin of Intentions, and it does not imply on any commitment to action. An Intention refers to a Goal an Agent decides to pursue and it is assumed the Agent is committed to act. An Intention can be characterized as a two-stage structure: an intention ' to do ' , i.e., to perform a given action, and an intention ' that ' , i.e., to realize a Goal [10]. For example, in the scenario of a fi re fi ghter whose intention is to rescue a victim under debris of a collapsed building, the intention ' that ' is to rescue a victim and the intention ' to do ' is the action of removing the debris over the victim. Goals can be just ' means ' , or instrumental, to higher-level goals. These instrumental goals are intermediate steps to achieve higher-level goals, and they can be added or dropped as part of the planning for the agents to act. The decisions about which goals should be chosen towards a higher-level goal, e.g. a process goal, is acknowledged as Goal Processing [10]. In this processing, beliefs play a major role, acting as test conditions and fi lters for goals to reach their fi nal stage, where goals become executive and then instantiate actions. Castelfranchi and Paglieri ' s [10] theoretical proposal stands in contrast with the dominant view of intentions. It suggests how to reduce the number of motivational primitives in BDI logics from two (desires and intentions) to one (goals), providing, at the same time, some insights on their mutual relationship. They propose a list of different types of goal-supporting beliefs that play different functional roles in goal processing, as described below, with illustrative examples of KiP scenarios:

Motivating Beliefs. Goals are often activated by beliefs on the current state of affairs. This category considers two sub-classes: (a) Triggering Beliefs : beliefs that reactively activate goals on the basis of a pre-established connection. For example, as a disaster management coordinator, it is my belief that if a flood started in my city it will activate my goal to provide operational support to a disaster response; (b) Conditional Beliefs : beliefs that activate a goal on the basis of the conditional nature of the goal itself. For example, as a loan of fi cer, it is my belief that today is the 10th day of a month that activates my conditional goal to check if borrowers paid their monthly debts. The presence of motivating beliefs enables goals to be activated.

Assessment Beliefs. In order to consider a goal as candidate for being pursued, an agent cannot conclude that such goal is either already realized, self-realizing, or impossible to be achieved. Assessment beliefs are divided in three subclasses: (a) Selfrealization beliefs : beliefs concerning the fact that a goal will come to be autonomously realized in the world. They may not require actions by the agent, e.g. due to natural processes or other agents that guarantee their achievement. For example, as a forensic investigator, it is my belief that a DNA exam obtained from a crime scene can last up to 14 days, which prevents me pursuing the goal of obtaining the results earlier; (b) Satisfaction beliefs : beliefs concerning the fact that a goal is already realized, and that it will remain as such without agents ' intervention. For example, as a physician, the belief that my patient has been cured prevents me pursuing the goal to continue treating the patient for the same disease; (c) Impossibility beliefs : beliefs concerning the fact that a goal is impossible at a given time, or it will never be possible. For example, as an air traf fi c controller, it is the belief that two aircrafts can collide if they concurrently land on the same runway that unsupports my goal to direct them to the same runway at the same time. The absence of assessment beliefs enables activated goals to be pursued.

Cost Beliefs. Beliefs concerning the costs or resources that an agent expects to sustain as a consequence of pursuing a certain goal. For example, as an architect, it is my belief about the high price of marble stone that makes me decide to not pursue the goal of making an entire staircase with this material within a housing project.

Incompatibility Beliefs. Beliefs concerning different forms of incompatibility between goals, that can force the agent to choose among them. For example, as a product designer, it is my belief that I cannot apply premium materials in a new product to ensure quality, and at the same time I want to offer a low-cost product, that prevents me pursuing both these goals concurrently.

Preference Beliefs. Beliefs concerning which goals should be given precedence over others in the current context. This category splits in two subclasses: (a) Value beliefs : concerning the subjective value of a certain goal, given how this goal will bene fi t the agent. For example, as a doctor, it is my belief that it is more valuable to treat a bone fracture than to treat skin scrapings of a patient that suffered a motorcycle fall that makes me choose fi rst the goal to treat the bone fracture; (b) Urgency beliefs : concerning when a goal will ' expire ' , i.e. it will be no more possible to achieve it. For example, as a fi re fi ghter, it is my belief that the fi re is about to reach a crowded room that makes me pursue the goal to start fi ghting the fi re fi rst in that room.

Precondition Beliefs. Beliefs concerning the necessary preconditions to successfully execute a chosen goal by executing the appropriate action. They are distinguished by two sub classes: (a) Incompetence beliefs : mainly concern both the basic competences, the suf fi cient skills and abilities needed to reach a goal, given agents ' convictions on how to achieve the goal. For example, as a doctor, it is my belief that I cannot start the surgery before an anesthetist applies sedation to the patient; (b) Lack of conditions beliefs : concern external conditions, opportunities, and resources. They cover both conditions for the execution of the appropriate actions and conditions for the success of a correctly performed action. For example, as a loan of fi cer, it is my belief that I cannot lend money until the client signs the loan contract. The absence of precondition beliefs enables chosen goals to be executed.

Means-end Beliefs. Beliefs concerning the instrumental relation between a goal and an action or an event which is considered to serve to achieve the former, and, therefore, can be assumed as a means to that end. For example, as a customer service of fi cer, it is my belief that I have to place a call to a client to obtain more details about an issue that makes me place the call to achieve the instrumental goal of obtaining more details, during a customer service process instance. Means-end beliefs enable chosen goals to be executive, i.e. they allow an action to be immediately performed.

Each belief type supports a goal in a speci fi c stage [10] as follows. Goal Activation is the stage where the support of Motivating Beliefs makes goals active. In the next stage (Goal Evaluation), goals are evaluated by the presence of Assessment Beliefs , which verify if the Active Goal is already satis fi ed, will be autonomously satis fi ed, or it is impossible to be achieved. In this phase, the Active Goals need not to be coherent, and are subject to conflicts, thus having to be further chosen or to be renounced. If an Active Goal passes this stage, it is a Pursuable Goal. In the sequence, Goal Deliberation is performed, where Pursuable Goals are tested by Preference and Cost Beliefs and, if there are no Incompatibility Beliefs , they can become Chosen Goals. At this point, a Chosen Goal becomes an intention of an agent towards a future action. In Goal Checking stage, if Chosen Goals have no more Precondition Beliefs constraining the intended action and Means-end Beliefs support these goals, the goals become executive and the actions can be immediately instantiated.

Another important aspect in Goal Processing is goal revision: each time the set of beliefs changes, their supported goals should also be revised in order to maintain proper goal support considering the ' new believed ' reality. For example, if the agent believes a goal is unattainable or it is no longer motivated by its condition or higher-level goals, that goal can be dropped. For instance, a KiP is subject to contingencies, that are de fi ned as unexpected events that interfere in the process execution. A contingency event may bring about to reality a state of affairs that force a change on the agent ' s beliefs, thus demanding a goal revision. For example, during a coronary bypass surgery, the blood pressure of the patient suddenly drops. Faced by this situation, the leading surgeon, that has the belief that extreme hypotension is a life-threatening condition, stops planned surgical activities to treat and restore the patient ' s blood pressure (a newly introduced instrumental goal) to normal levels, so the surgery can continue.

## 2.3 Value Ascription

Goals give value to actions [16] and value can be ascribed to past, current or envisioned experiences, involving or not a value object as the center of analysis [17]. This postulate about Value Experience is corroborated by the marketing domain where it is stated that ' Value resides not in the object of consumption, but in the experience of consumption ' [18]. The diagram 1 on Fig. 1 presents an excerpt of COVER ontology [8] depicting the relation of Value Experiences and Goals .

Fig. 1. Relationship between Goals and Value Experiences [8]. (Color fi gure online)

[FIGURE]

According to UFO [13], Events change reality by changing the state of affairs from one (pre-state) Situation to another (post-state) Situation . A Value Experience aggregates Value Events , which can be Impact Events , that are a kind of Value Event which brings about Situations that are Impactful Outcomes . Such outcomes may be positive or negative, related to value or risk ascriptions, respectively, and they impact the Intention of an Agent that is the Value Subject participating in the Value Experience . Every Intention has a Goal as propositional content. This brought about Impactful Outcome can satisfy a Goal to a given degree, which can be determined by the comparison of the Impactful Outcome and the expected state of affairs to be reached when the Goal is achieved. As stated by Azevedo et al. [19], the situations that satisfy a goal are the ones in which value has been produced or their effect is realized.

1 From now on, we adopt the following color-coding scheme: events are represented in yellow, objects in pink, qualities and modes in blue, relators in green, situations in orange, propositions in purple and powertypes in white. Italic font style highlights classes ' names appearances in the text. For colorful fi gures, please refer to the online version.

## 3 Goal Processing and Value Ascription Roles in KiPs

In this section, we propose a conceptual model to formally de fi ne decision-making in KiPs based on Value Ascription and Goal Processing theories. Essentially, a Decision is represented as a Value Experience which an Agent can ascribe value to, referred to the goals supported by the agent ' s beliefs. Firstly, we provide precise de fi nitions of belief types and goal stages from Goal Processing theory. We anchored these constructs on UFO, so they can also be properly integrated with KiPO and COVER constructs, as these two ontologies are already well-founded on UFO. Figure 2 summarizes the proposed Goal Processing conceptual model that also considers the guidelines for multi-level modeling described in [20].

A Belief Type is a specialization of an UFO::Intrinsic Moment Universal and categorizes UFO::Belief . An instance of a Belief Type , like a Motivating Belief , is also a specialization of UFO::Belief . A Goal Type is a specialization of UFO::Goal Universal and partitions UFO::Goal in one of the four Goal Processing Stages according to Castelfranchi and Paglieri ' s theory [10]. The partition relation is applied to disjointly categorize a fi rst order type [20] ( Goal Type ), since according to the Goal Processing Theory, a Goal must be present in only a single stage at a time. For example, an Active Goal ceases to be active after the Goal Evaluation task, when the Goal becomes a Pursuable Goal and so on. An instance of a Goal Type , e.g. an Active Goal , is also a specialization of an UFO::Goal . Each instance of a Belief Type relates to instances of Goal Type according to the Goal Processing stages (Fig. 2), e.g., a Pursuable Goal is evaluated by Assessment Beliefs during the Goal Evaluation task.

Goal-orientation is a characteristic of KiPs. As stated by Di Ciccio et al. [2] for a KiP: ' The process evolves through a series of intermediate goals or milestones to be achieved. Process participants continuously assess process progression and then act or plan the actions to be performed, depending on the process status and the available data and knowledge elements ' . It is also important to consider that goals do not only derive from internal motives, but they may originate from duties, obligations or may also be imported, in forms of requests, orders, norms, and roles [21]. KiPs occur in the context of organizations, which may have their own business rules, norms and roles. As the focus of this work is on existing KiPs rather on design of new ones, it is assumed that KiP goals are already existing. In these scenarios, whenever agents participate in a KiP, it is expected that the agents are aware of the normative structures of the organization they belong to. Thus, some goals of the organization may be imported by the agents that participate in a KiP. This goal adoption can be seen as an agent doing something for others, even though there is no sincere desire towards that goal. Thus, what motivates an agent to act, even when there is no genuine desire to act, can be either a desire to pursue a higher-level goal or a norm/obligation due to a commitment to the organization.

The Self-Determination Theory (SDT) [16] is one of many motivation theories that explains the origins of agents ' initiatives to act by specifying different types of motivation [22]. Gagn é and Deci [23] af fi rm that activities that are not interesting (i.e., that are not intrinsically motivating) require extrinsic motivation, such as implicit approval or tangible rewards, which are called external regulations in SDT. According to Eccles and Wig fi eld [22], a task can be ascribed a positive value by a person because it facilitates important future goals, even if this person is not interested in the task for his/her own sake. For instance, students often take classes they do not particularly enjoy but that they need to take in order to pursue other interests, for example, to please their parents, or to obtain an academic degree.

Once an agent is committed towards a goal, an intentional structure is formed. The intention ' to do ' may converge into a complex intentional action, performed by subactions. In a KiP, this ' to do ' structure can be seen as a KiA, which is essentially a complex action (Event) and, as such, may also be composed by other KiAs.

Fig. 2. Goal types and their respective supporting beliefs [10] anchored on UFO.

[FIGURE]

Decisions in a KiP are considered a special case of KiAs, where agents ponder the possible alternatives and then choose the ones they believe will mostly satisfy a goal. We argue that decisions heavily depend on the value or risk agents ascribe to that decision experience based on the possible outcomes of the decision. The following diagrams (Figs. 3 and 4) present the proposed formalization of the notion of value ascription and decision-making in the context of KiPs. Each introduced new concept is well-founded on an UFO construct. As KiPO and COVER are already anchored on UFO, and due to space limitations, we omit their respective UFO specializations and apply namespaces to refer to reused classes from their founding ontologies. As stated by COVER, Value inheres in a Value Ascription . It is worth noting that COVER considers that the notion of Risk is irreducibly intertwined with the notion of Value , that is, Risk Ascription is a particular case of Value Ascription . In this sense, the Risk specialization from Value concept aims to emphasize a counter-value position, where the outcomes of an event may generate a negative impact or a loss for the Value Subject , that is the participant of a Value Experience . A KiA , being an Event, can be a specialization of a Value Experience , and a Decision , as a specialization of a KiA, inheres the same properties of a Value Experience . Value Ascription is a relation that also involves a Value Assessor , i.e. the one who judges the value of a Value Ascription . This ascription is also directly affected by the intrinsic properties of the Value Objects that may participate in a Value Experience . In a KiP setting, the agents that participate in the process are called Participants , and they can be both Value Assessor Participants , judging the value of a KiA or a Decision , or Value Subject Participants , participating in a KiA or making a Decision to solve a Question (Fig. 3).

According to KiPO, an Impact Agent , which is also a KiP Participant , is responsible for executing KiAs and for identifying Questions that trigger Decisions . KiPO de fi nes Alternatives as situations that are brought about by making a Decision . Some Alternatives can be discarded due to lack of supporting beliefs, such as when participants do not believe that they can cause any impact that will contribute to achieve a Goal or when these Alternatives are to be brought about by a negative Impact Event (a Loss Event ). Conversely, a Chosen Alternative is supported by beliefs that it can cause an impact that contributes to achieve a Goal . The situation brought about by a Chosen Alternative is a pre-state for action, thus, from this point, a Participant can manifest an Intention to act, with the propositional content of a Chosen Goal . If there are no more precondition beliefs preventing the action to be executed, the Goal becomes an Executive Goal and an Activity can be immediately performed (Fig. 4).

Fig. 3. Value Ascription to Knowledge-intensive Activities and Decisions.

[FIGURE]

The following scenario presents an example of the presence of value concepts and belief support to process a goal during the execution of a KiP. In a disaster management process, Anne, a fi re fi ghter, has to rescue people from a building on fi re. It is undoubtedly true that she does not inhere the desire of putting her own life at risk, what would be an inevitable consequence of entering the building. Nevertheless, she adopts the goal of ' making people safe ' from her role, and as such, she commits herself (that is, she chooses this goal and plans to act) to enter the building. The goal of ' entering the building on fi re ' is an instrumental goal to achieve the higher-level process goal of

' making people safe ' . This goal adoption may be motivated by an external regulation of not feeling guilty if some victim gets deceased as a consequence of her lack of immediate action and also relates to the use value ascribed to the decision to move and enter the building, needed to help her achieve the process goal. To support this goal, urgency (she believes that the fi re will reach the victims very fast) and skill beliefs (she received proper training, and knows she is capable to perform the rescue) are the most important mental moments inhered in her when she chooses the instrumental goal to enter the building.

Fig. 4. A Decision in a KiP as a Value Experience.

[FIGURE]

KiPO de fi nes Risk as the propositional content of an Alternative that threatens a Decision . It does not elaborate on the ontological nature of Risk and how it can be of much more interest for KiPs than being constrained to a proposition. As Risk can be seen as a special case of Value [8], depending on the Goal and Beliefs inhering in a Participant , there can be exclusively a Risk Ascription to a Decision , instead of a Value Ascription . For example, an air traf fi c control of fi cer has the Goal to direct the landing of two aircrafts in the same airport in a very short time window. The demands of two aircrafts landing almost simultaneously is a Threat Event (specialization of a Trigger Event when it involves Risk Ascription ) that triggers the Risk Experience . It is a Decision to be made considering the existing Alternatives , and it puts the of fi cer as a Risk Subject since it is the Goal of air traf fi c controllers to safely route the aircrafts (the Process Goal). Considering that the occurrence of a Loss Event will cause severe consequences, a high Risk is ascribed to this Decision . For the instrumental Goal of orienting two quasi-concurrent landings, the of fi cer must have Beliefs supporting this Goal . For example, if the Risk Subject has an Incompatibility Belief that it is unsafe to land two aircrafts in a short time window (a Discarded Alternative ), the of fi cer decides to authorize one aircraft to land and put the second on hold until it can safely approximate to land.

KiPs are also recognized as collaboration-oriented processes [2], as the participation of multiple agents is expected for the achievement of process goals. In most organizations, strict cooperation is a premise, and incentives, such as material rewards or social approval, can be offered to foster this behavior, acting as external regulations. By these considerations, it is assumed that KiP participants are committed to cooperate towards the process goals. Beyond the aforementioned case where one agent adopts the organization ' s goals, there is also a need of a group of agents to form a single whole point of view of beliefs and goals about the process. It is trivial to assume that most of the participants will adhere to a higher-level goal of a KiP due to their commitment to the organization, but for the instrumental goals, it is necessary to establish proper communications among the agents in favor of reaching consensus. Discussions about communications in KiPs have been performed in [24], however, their role in goal processing still deserves a detailed analysis, and for this reason, this topic is left out of the scope of this paper and is planned as future work.

## 4 The Ontological Nature of Decision-Making in a Real-Life KiP

To exemplify how the proposed conceptual models can properly represent decisionmaking in KiPs, we inspected a real-life KiP from the air traf fi c control domain. The speci fi c process instance comprises the procedures taken by the air traf fi c control and the pilot of the flight 1549, which crash-landed on New York ' s Hudson River in 2009, with no casualties. This happening was essentially a KiP, since it involved ad-hoc decisions performed by experienced agents, a contingency event and collaboration among all participants. The analysis relies on the inspection of the transcription 2 of the communications among LaGuardia tower, Teterboro tower, New York Terminal Radar Approach Control (TRACON) and the aircraft. Due to space restrictions we focus on speci fi c points of the transcription that contain externalizations of mental states from participating agents or characterizations of decision-making events.

At time 20:27:36 (hh:mm:ss, UTC time), the pilot externalized his Belief that the plane lost thrust in both engines due to a collision with birds: '… Hit birds, we lost thrust in both engines. We ' re turning back towards LaGuardia. ' . This supporting belief activated an Instrumental Goal to return to LaGuardia airport in order to achieve the higher-level Goal of safely transporting people from a point to another (the Process Goal). At time 20:28:11, the pilot evaluated the Active Goal by the presence of an Impossibility Belief when he stated: ' We ' re unable (to return to LaGuardia). We may end up in the Hudson. ' At that time, he also dropped this fi rst Goal and activated a new unexpected Instrumental Goal: to land on Hudson River.

In 20:29:02-03, the pilot considered an Alternative to try to land at Teterboro airport offered by TRACON. At 20:29:21, TRACON authorized the plane to land at Teterboro. At this point, the pilot had to choose between landing at Teterboro or at the Hudson River. This deliberation was supported by a Value Belief (a subtype of a Preference Belief) that landing at the Hudson River would be less risky (a Risk Ascription) than turning to Teterboro. At 20:29:25 the pilot manifested an unusual Decision and refused the Alternative to go to Teterboro runway, since he ascribed a higher Risk to this action because it could imply on more severe consequences (a Loss Event), e.g., the plane would crash on ground and in an urban area. In the sequence (20:29:28), the pilot made his last contact: ' We ' re gonna be in the Hudson. ' . This statement represents a Chosen Goal, which turned to be executive since there were no more preconditions prior to the pilot take action and proceed to land on the river.

2 The full transcription is available in: https://www.faa.gov/data\_research/accident\_incident/1549/ media/Full%20Transcript%20L116.pdf.

## 5 Conclusions

As human agents are a central piece for KiPs execution, shedding light in how agents ' mental states drive them to make decisions and perform actions towards goals is of paramount relevance. More speci fi cally, it is interestingly tricky to understand the ontological nature of these cognitive elements and how they relate to the goals adopted from external sources (such as an organization the agent is committed to) in a way that value aggregation is perceived by both parties, in what would be considered contradictory situations at a fi rst sight, such as the outcome of a decision ' to land a commercial aircraft on a river ' and the goal ' to safely transport people ' .

The main contribution of this work is a conceptual model, in the form of a wellfounded ontology, as a novel perspective for precisely explaining how process participants choose goals, make decisions and perform actions based on the notions of goal processing and value ascription. As a practical implication, the model can be of relevance for any organization to help it precisely understand several collaborative and unpredictable critical scenarios. Organizations can bene fi t of the proposed conceptualization as a reference to analyze their KiPs, now considering that the associated agents perform value ascriptions when making decisions prior to action. Besides, these actions are only formulated after a series of assessments based on agents ' beliefs that process instrumental goals needed to achieve business processes successful states.

We are aware that this work did not detail the possible origins of contingency events, which are a main source of questions that trigger decisions. This limits the scope of the present work, by assuming that these events can happen unexpectedly during process execution. The proposed models also do not address neither the social roles of process participants nor the communication perspective within KiPs and goal processing. This perspective is relevant because it is through communication that agents interact with each other, share their beliefs and form a common ground to make collective decisions to achieve process goals. We have focused on agents ' internal mental states that make them take individual decisions within the social context of a KiP. This leaves space for further investigations in the future.

We successfully applied the proposed conceptual model to support analysis of a complex and real-life KiP instance, showing the intrinsic and non-intuitive behavior that may emerge from such processes. There is, of course, a need to collect more evidences to demonstrate the descriptive and explanatory power of the proposed model, which will demandabroaderempirical evaluation to validate the model under different KiP domains. Domains that are in our agenda to be investigated include: software development and troubleshooting processes. Future work may also relate value and risk ascription of decisions to process performance outcomes. Since these ascriptions are associated with a goal evaluation function, this should help model process performance of KiPs.

## References

1. Dumas, M., La Rosa, M., Mendling, J., Reijers, H.: Fundamentals of Business Process Management. Springer, Heidelberg (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-56509-4
2. Di Ciccio, C., Marrella, A., Russo, A.: Knowledge-intensive processes: characteristics, requirements and analysis of contemporary approaches. J. Data Semant. 4 , 29 -57 (2014)
3. Marjanovic, O., Freeze, R.: Knowledge intensive business processes: theoretical foundations and research challenges. In: 44th International Conference on System Sciences (2011)
4. Fran ç a, J., Netto, J., Carvalho, J., Santoro, F., Bai ã o, F., Pimentel, M.: KIPO: the knowledge-intensive process ontology. Softw. Syst. Model. 14 (3), 1127 -1157 (2014)
5. I ş ik, Ö ., Mertens, W., Van den Bergh, J.: Practices of knowledge intensive process management: quantitative insights. Bus. Process Manag. J. 19 , 515 -534 (2013)
6. Vaculin, R., Hull, R., Heath, T., Cochran, C., Nigam, A., Sukaviriya, P.: Declarative business artifact centric modeling of decision and knowledge intensive business processes. In: IEEE 15th International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference (2011)
7. Mundbrod, N., Reichert, M.: Process-aware task management support for knowledgeintensive business processes: fi ndings, challenges, requirements. In: IEEE 18th International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference Workshops and Demos (2014)
8. Sales, T.P., Bai ã o, F., Guizzardi, G., Almeida, J.P.A., Guarino, N., Mylopoulos, J.: The common ontology of value and risk. In: Trujillo, J.C., et al. (eds.) ER 2018. LNCS, vol. 11157, pp. 121 -135. Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-00847-5\_11
9. Guarino, N., Andersson, B., Johannesson, P., Livieri, B.: Towards an ontology of value ascription. In: Formal Ontology in Information Systems, vol. 283, p. 331 (2016)
10. Castelfranchi, C., Paglieri, F.: The role of beliefs in goal dynamics: prolegomena to a constructive theory of intentions. Synthese 155 , 237 -263 (2007)
11. Bratman, M.: Intention, Plans, and Practical Reason, vol. 10. Harvard University Press, Cambridge (1987)
12. Wig fi eld, A., Cambria, J.: Achievement motivation. In: The Corsini Encyclopedia of Psychology, pp. 1 -2 (2010)
13. Guizzardi, G.: Ontological Foundations for Structural Conceptual Models. Telematica Instituut/CTIT, Enschede (2005)
14. Guizzardi, G., Wagner, G., Almeida, J., Guizzardi, R.: Towards ontological foundations for conceptual modeling: the uni fi ed foundational ontology (UFO) story. Appl. Ontol. 10 , 259 -271 (2015)
15. Rao, A.S., Georgeff, M.P.: BDI agents: from theory to practice. In: Proceedings of the First International Conference on Multiagent Systems, vol. 95, pp. 312 -319 (1995)
16. Ryan, R., Deci, E.: Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: classic de fi nitions and new directions. Contemp. Educ. Psychol. 25 , 54 -67 (2000)
17. Sales, T., Guarino, N., Guizzardi, G., Mylopoulos, J.: An ontological analysis of value propositions. In: IEEE 21st International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference (EDOC) (2017)
18. Frow, P., Payne, A.: Towards the ' perfect ' customer experience. J. Brand Manag. 15 , 89 -101 (2007)

19. Azevedo, C., Almeida, J., van Sinderen, M., Quartel, D., Guizzardi, G.: An ontology-based semantics for the motivation extension to archimate. In: IEEE 15th International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference (2011)
20. Carvalho, V., Almeida, J., Fonseca, C., Guizzardi, G.: Multi-level ontology-based conceptual modeling. Data Knowl. Eng. 109 , 3 -24 (2017)
21. Castelfranchi, C.: Intentions in the light of goals. Topoi 33 , 103 -116 (2014)
22. Eccles, J., Wig fi eld, A.: Motivational beliefs, values, and goals. Ann. Rev. Psychol. 53 , 109 -132 (2002)
23. Gagn é , M., Deci, E.: Self-determination theory and work motivation. J. Organ. Behav. 26 , 331 -362 (2005)
24. Richetti, P.H.P., de A.R. Gon ç alves, J.C., Bai ã o, F.A., Santoro, F.M.: Analysis of knowledge-intensive processes focused on the communication perspective. In: Carmona, J., Engels, G., Kumar, A. (eds.) BPM 2017. LNCS, vol. 10445, pp. 269 -285. Springer, Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65000-5\_16
