## Exploring Ontologies for Semantic Documentation in Project Management

Erick Casagrande Bastos, Monalessa Perini Barcellos, Ricardo de Almeida Falbo

Ontology and Conceptual Modeling Research Group (NEMO), Department of Computer Science, Federal University of Espírito Santo -Vitória -ES -Brazil

{erickcasagrande, monalessa, falbo}@inf.ufes.br

Abstract. Although there are several tools devoted to support project management, documents are widely used as an instrument to record information regarding projects. However, retrieving information from documents is usually not trivial and depends on human effort. In this paper we discuss  the  use  of  semantic  annotation  of  desktop  documents  in  the  project management context. The main results of a study that investigated initiatives involving  semantic  annotation  to  support  project  management  aspects  are presented, as well as an ongoing work in which we explore a software project management  domain  ontology  to  annotate  desktop  documents  and  extend  a semantic document management platform.

## 1. Introduction

Documents are an important instrument to record and share information in the project management domain, since they provide useful information for communication between people and for an effective understanding about the project [Bruggemann et al. 2000].

There are several tools to support project management, but they are not used by all organizations.   Spreadsheets  are  widely  used  for  organizations  that  have  limited access  to  sophisticated  tools  to  support  some  project  management  activities,  such  as schedule and budget planning and control [Villalobos et al. 2011]. Furthermore, project management  supporting  tools  often  do  not  eliminate  the  need  of  using  desktop documents (e.g., text documents and spreadsheets).

One disadvantage of using documents is the difficulty of obtaining consolidated information  from  them.  The  access  to  their  contents  typically  depends  on  human intervention,  since  they  were  originally  designed  to  be  read  by  humans,  not  to  be manipulated by machines. As a consequence, retrieving and analyzing document content can be unproductive and sometimes inefficient. Besides, gathering relevant information from different documents can be so wearing that people may tend not to do that [Arantes and Falbo 2010].

In  the  Semantic  Web  community,  researchers  have  defended  that  ontologybased metadata can be added into web contents so that these contents become available for  machine  interpretation.  The  act  of  adding  ontology-based  metadata  into  syntactic information resources making them semantic information resources is named semantic annotation .  Ontologies are an ideal vehicle for describing the vocabulary for metadata statements, providing a rich formal semantic structure for their interpretation. Therefore ontology is often used as basis for annotation [Sicilia 2006].

Semantic Web principles can be applied to documents rendered by desktop tools (e.g., text and spreadsheet editors), giving rise to Semantic Documentation , which aims at  making  document content interpretable by computers.  In this  context,  several  tools have  been  developed  to  support  semantic  annotation,  such  as  the  Infrastructure  for Managing Semantic Documents (IMSD) [Arantes and Falbo 2010], PDFTab [Eriksson 2007] and KIM [Kiryakov et al. 2004], which use domain ontologies for semantically annotating  documents  and  provide  a  set  of  general  features  for  managing  semantic documents (e.g., documents annotation, storage, indexing and retrieval), being applicable  to  several  domains.  These  tools  provide  only  general  features  and  do  not explore  the  specific  conceptualization  provided  by  the  domain  ontologies.  In  order  to provide  a  more  effective  support  to  domain-specific  tasks,  it  is  useful  to  explore  the ontology elements (concepts, relations and properties) and use them to develop domainspecific functionalities [Falbo et al. 2014].

In this paper, we explore the use of domain ontologies for semantic documentation  in  Project  Management.  First,  we  started  by  carrying  out  a  systematic literature  review (SLR) to analyze initiatives that support project management aspects by using semantic annotation. The use of semantic annotation in the Project Management domain can help project managers to get consolidated information from data stored in different documents and to make decisions based on it.   Taking that into account,  we  aim  at  extending  IMSD  to  explore  specific  features  to  support  project management.

This  paper  is  organized  as  following:  Section  2  talks  briefly  about  semantic documentation  and  project  management.  Section  3  addresses  the  performed  SLR. Section  4  presents  a  fragment  of  the  Software  Project  Management  Ontology  we developed  and  discusses  its  use  to  extend  IMSD.  Section  5  concerns  related  works. Finally, Section 6 presents our final considerations.

## 2. Semantic Documentation and Project Management

In  organizations  there  is  a  considerable amount of work done by using desktop tools. Semantic  Documentation  is  a  key  for  tackling  the  lack  of  semantics  in  desktop documents. Semantic documents provide services such as advanced search, reasoning using document  metadata, and knowledge  management  services, like  document repositories and document management [Eriksson and Bang 2006].

The problems related to accessing and managing document content clearly occur in the Project Management  context,  since  text  documents  and  spreadsheets  are frequently  used  as  instruments  for  recording  and  sharing  information  among  project members. In this sense, semantic annotation has potential use in this area.

Project  management  involves  the  application  of  knowledge,  skills,  tools  and techniques  to  project  activities  aiming  to  meet  project  requirements  [PMI  2013]. According to the PMBOK [PMI 2013], there are ten knowledge areas (KAs) related to project management, i.e., there are ten KAs to be managed, namely: Integration, Scope, Stakeholder, Human  Resource,  Time,  Cost, Risk, Quality,  Communication,  and Procurement.

Project  management  comprehends  three  main  interactive  phases  [Pressman 2011]:  planning,  execution,  and  monitoring  and  control.  During  project  planning it  is established a plan to the project, including the project scope, allocated human resources, schedule, budget and risks, among others.  Execution consists of running the plan, i.e., execute the project following the established plan. In this phase the project results are produced  and  most  of  budget  and  efforts  are  spent.  Monitoring  and  control  aims  to compare the plans with the execution, identify problems and present solutions. During this  phase,  performance  indicators  can  help  the  project  manager  to  understand  the project progress and performance based on the project scope, schedule and budget.

During a project, relevant information regarding planning, progress, monitoring and control is recorded in text documents and spreadsheets (e.g., project management plan and status reports). If information is structured and annotated, computers can help to handle it. Besides, semantic annotation could help store and retrieve the knowledge acquired in a project and reuse it in other projects.

## 3. Systematic Literature Review [Kitchenham, B. and Charters 2007]

Aiming at identifying and analyzing initiatives involving semantic annotation to support Project  Management,  we  carried  out  a  systematic  literature  review.  According  to Kitchenham  et  al.  (2011),  systematic  literature  reviews  are  secondary  studies  used  to find, critically evaluate and aggregate all relevant research papers on a specific research question  or  research  topic.  The  methodology  is  intended  to  ensure  that  the  literature review is unbiased, rigorous and auditable.   The study followed the review process defined  by  Kitchenham  and  Charters  (2007),  which  involves  three  phases:  planning, when the research protocol is defined; conducting, when the protocol is executed and data are extracted, analyzed and recorded; and reporting, when the results are recorded and made available. Next, we present the main parts of the protocol used in the study.

## 3.1 Research Protocol [Kitchenham, B. A. et al. 2011]

Research  Questions: The  main  research  question  is (RQ1)  What  are  the  initiatives involving  semantic  annotation  that  support  project  management  aspects? From  this general  question,  two  more  specific were defined: (RQ2) How semantic annotation is addressed? and (RQ3) Which are the aspects of project management supported?

Search String: The search string has two groups of terms joined by the AND operator. The  first  group  aims  at  capturing  studies  that  deal  with  semantic  annotation  and semantic  documentation.  The  second  group  aims  to  capture  studies  related  to  project management.  Within  each  group,  the  OR  operator  was  used  to  allow  for  alternative terms. The  following search string was  used: ((("semantic  documentation")  OR ("semantic  annotation")  OR  ("semantic-document")  OR  ("semantic  document"))  AND (("project  management")  OR  ("project  planning")  OR  ("project  controlling")  OR ("project control") OR ("project monitoring") OR ("project tracking"))) .

Sources: Five digital libraries  were  searched,  namely:  Scopus  ( www.scopus.com ), Engineering  Village  ( www.engineeringvillage.com ),  ACM  ( dl.acm.org ),  IEEE  Xplore ( ieeexplore.ieee.org ) and ScienceDirect ( www.sciencedirect.com ).

Publications Selection: the object of analysis are articles published in scientific events or journals. Publications selection was done in four steps:  the 1 st step (S1), Preliminary Selection  and  Cataloging ,  consisted  in  applying  the  search  string  by  using  the  digital library search mechanism. Publication language was limited to English, and the search scope was limited to title, abstract and keywords. At the end of this step, publications indexed by more than one digital library were identified and duplications were removed. The 2 nd Step (S2), Selection of Relevant Publications -1 st filter ,  involved reading the abstracts of the publications selected in S1 and analyzing them considering the inclusion criterion  IC1  -  the  publication  presents  some  proposal  involving  semantic  annotation that supports aspects related to project management, and two exclusion criteria: EC1 the  publication  does  not  have  an  abstract;  and  EC2 - the publication is not a primary study. The   3rd  Step  (S3), Selection  of  Relevant  Publications -2 nd filter ,  consisted  of reading the full text of the publications selected in S2 and analyzing them considering IC1  and  other  three  exclusion  criteria:  EC3  -  the  study  was  published  only  as  an abstract; EC4 - the publication full text is not available; and EC5 - the publication is a copy or an older version of an already selected publication. Finally, in the four step (S4) we  performed Backward  Snowballing [Webster  and  Watson  2002] , investigating  if among the references cited in the selected papers, there was some useful to the study.

## 3.2 Data Synthesis

The systematic review was finished at the beginning of 2015  and considered publications until December 31 st 2014.  As a result of S1, 39 publications were obtained (21 in Scopus, 13 in Engineering Village, 5 in IEEE). No publication was returned by applying  the  search  string  to  ACM  and  ScienceDirect.  After  duplication  removal,  24 publications remained. 21 publications were selected in S2 and 4 in S3. None new paper was selected in S4. The selected papers were published during the last decade, meaning that  the  research  topic  is  recent. In fact, we expected to find only recent publications, because semantic annotation was applied to semantic documents only in the 2000's. The small number of publications selected shows that, in addition to be recent, the topic has not been much explored. Next, a data synthesis to each research question is presented.

RQ1.  What  are  the  initiatives  involving  semantic  annotation  that  support  project management aspects? Four initiatives were found:

-  Semantic Annotation based on Software Knowledge Sharing Space ( SKSS ) [Lu et al. 2008]: SKSS is a system that aims to improve knowledge sharing among software development team members. It allows annotating documents produced during projects, creating a network that facilitates accessing and sharing information about the project.
-  Content  Management for  Inter-Organization  Projects ( CMIO) [Nakatsuka  and Ishida  2006]  :  CMIO  is  a  system  to  manage  content  of  inter-organizational  projects. Project content is semantically annotated, and when a project member creates, modifies or manages content in a project, automatic emails are sent to the other project members, communicating explicitly what has changed in the project.
-  Collaboration in Public Policy Making, Implementation and Evaluation ( CPPMIE ) [Loukis 2007]: CPPMIE consists of a structured electronic forum in which participants  opine  about  programs,  projects,  tasks  and  deliverables  related  to  public policies. A Public Policy Ontology is used for semantically annotating posts, allowing organization, indexing, integration and querying of the posts recorded in the forums.

 Semex [Talaš et al. 2010] : Semex is a module of a project management system. It is responsible  for  semantic  annotation  of  wiki  pages.  It  supports  creation,  sharing  and publication of collaborative content in projects, providing a common environment that allows project team members to access information and contribute to discussions.

## RQ2.  How semantic annotation is addressed in the initiative?

In  this  question,  we  analyzed  the  semantic  annotation  approach  used  in  each  study, considering  aspects  such  as  semantic  annotation  type,  annotated  files,  ontologies  and technologies involved. Regarding semantic annotation type, it is manual  when annotations are made by the user. It is automatic when automation components are used to provide suggestions for annotations or make them automatically [Uren et al. 2006].

In  SKSS,  semantic  annotation  is  used  to  connect  information  recorded  in different  documents.  Word,  Eclipse,  VS.Net  and  Adobe  Reader  documents  can  be annotated.  Annotation  is  manual  and  based  on  Project,  Annotation  and  Document domain  ontologies.  A  framework  composed  of  three  components  is  used:  the sensor component  is  a  plug-in  embedded  into  tools  (MS  Word,  Adobe  Reader,  Eclipse  and Visual  Studio)  that  adds  semantic  annotations  and  connects  information  recorded  in different documents; the service provider component deals with knowledge publishing, ontology  management  and  query;  and  the database component  stores  annotation instances, ontologies and documents, and supports version control.

In  CMIO,  semantic  annotation  is  manual  and  made  by  using  an  application named Project Organizer, which allows for annotating web pages, PDF files and text documents using a Project domain ontology as a basis. CMIO uses e-mail metaphor, i.e., it semantically annotates documents, connects information recorded in different documents,  and  when  document  content  is  created,  modified  or  managed,  automatic emails are sent to project members communicating the changes. A RDF database is used to store content, metadata and associations.

CPPMIE annotates web documents and electronic forum pages. The annotation is manual and based on a Public Policy domain ontology. A structured electronic forum based  on  the  ontology  is  used  to  record  posts  about  public  policies  projects  and programs.  Information  semantically  annotated  in  posts  is  retrieved  and  an  XML  file containing relevant information is produced.

Semex  annotates  wiki  pages,  allowing  for  browsing  pages  containing  project content  and  selecting  information  related  to  the  projects  (e.g.,  projects  that  share  a certain human resource). Semantic annotation is manual and uses a Project Management and Presentation domain ontology as a basis. Semex uses RDF triple to annotate wiki pages and RDFLib library ( www.rdflib.net ) to work with RDF.

## RQ3.  Which are the aspects of project management supported by the initiative?

Aspects  related  to  four  KA  are  supported  by  the  initiatives:  Scope,  Integration, Communication and Stakeholder Management.

Communication Management KA covers communication planning (definition of what information should be available; how, when and where it should be recorded; who is  responsible  for  recording  it;  and  who  can  access  it),  management  (communication plan  execution)  and  controlling  (comparison  between  planned  and  executed,  and corrective actions execution). Three proposals support this KA, mainly in aspects related to  communication  management,  which  occurs  during  the  project  execution  phase.  In SKSS,  semantic  annotation  helps  information  recording  and  sharing.  For  instance, documents produced during the project can be annotated and related one to others in a knowledge network. As a result, when a document is accessed by a project member, she also gets its related documents. In Semex, a common knowledge base is shared between projects  and  supports  information  sharing.  Semantic  annotation  allows  for  browsing pages containing project content and selecting information related to the projects (e.g., projects that share a certain human resource). CMIO supports project content creation, modification and management,  and  sends  automatic  emails  to  project  members communicating the changes made. By doing this, CMIO also supports aspects related to Integration Management  that  includes, among  others, integrated  change control, consisting of recording the project changes, their reasons, and performing the necessary actions in an integrated way.

CPPMIE supports Scope and Stakeholder Management aspects. Scope Management  concerns  the  definition  of  the  work  to  be  done  in  the  project,  while Stakeholder Management involves identifying and managing project stakeholders, their expectations and involvement. The CPPMIE forum is used to define the public policies and  requirements  to  be  addressed  in  projects,  i.e.,  the  project  scope.  Moreover,  the forum helps to interact with stakeholders, encouraging the appropriate involvement of them in project activities.

## 3.3 Discussions

By analyzing the selected papers, we noticed that, except by Semex, the proposals were not  conceived  aiming  to  support  project  management.  Thus,  although  the  proposals support aspects related to project management, this is not their main concern.

Regarding the semantic annotation approach adopted, all proposals use domain ontologies  as  a  basis  for  annotating  documents  or  web  pages.  Spreadsheets  are  not annotated in any proposal. Also, all proposals adopt manual annotation. According to Uren  et  al.  (2006),  automation  is  a  desirable  requirement  in  semantic  annotation proposals.  Manual  annotation  is  an  additional  burden,  because  human  annotators  are prone to error and non-trivial annotations usually require domain expertise. However, there are research challenges in this direction, related to the extraction of relations for semantic annotation.

As for  the  project  management  aspects  addressed,  the  proposals  support  some ones related to Scope, Integration, Communication and Stakeholder Management. Since Communication  Management  is  related  to  information  recording  and  sharing,  and semantic annotation supports them, it was expected that Communication was among the main supported areas. The other knowledge areas that are supported by the proposals usually  produce  documents  as  results  of  their  activities  (e.g.,  requirements  document produced  in  Scope  Management).  Time  and  Cost  Management,  which  are  important areas in project management, are not supported by any proposal. Semantic annotation could help relate and sequence the project activities and control the schedule. Besides, it could  support  cost  and  quality  control,  for  example,  by  establishing  relationships between  costs  and  activities,  and  between  changes  and  deliverables.  However,  these KAs  are  typically  well  supported  by  project  management  systems  (e.g.,  MSProject). This  can  be  one  of  the  reasons  why  these  areas  have  not  been  target  of  semantic annotation initiatives. Besides, the use of semantic annotation in project management is very recent. Thus, there are still many aspects to be explored.

As  limitations  of  this  systematic  review,  we  highlight  the  small  number  of selected publications. Although  five digital libraries have  been  used, only four publications  were  identified  and  only  one  of  them  is  truly  devoted  to  the  project management domain. This fact shows that the research topic is recent and has not been much explored. Since documents are still an important instrument to record and share information regarding projects, we believe that the use of semantic annotation on project management is a relevant topic, and there are opportunities of research in this area.

## 4. Using Semantic Annotation to support Project Management

In order to explore the use of semantic annotation in the project management context, we extended the Infrastructure for Managing Semantic Documents (IMSD) [Arantes and Falbo 2010]. IMSD provides: (i) a  way  to  semantically  annotate document templates; (ii) a  mechanism for controlling versions of semantic content extracted from semantic document versions, and therefore providing a way for tracking the evolution of the data embedded  inside  a  semantic  document;  and (iii) data  visibility  to  end-users  allowing searches and data change notification subscription to aid developers to get an up-to-date information about something they are interested in.

IMSD supports the use of templates in text format. Since spreadsheets are very useful for recording data regarding projects (e.g., schedules and budges), we decided to extend  IMSD  to  work  with  spreadsheets,  expanding  the  scope  of  files  used  as  data sources.  Moreover,  in  order  to  annotate  document  and  spreadsheet  templates  with metadata related  to  software  project  management,  we  developed  the  Software  Project Management  Ontology.  Thus,  we  explored  its  conceptualization  in  domain-specific features to support project management activities.

## 4.1 The Software Project Management Ontology

The  Software  Project  Management  Ontology  (SPMOnt)  was  developed  based  on  the Software Process Ontology Pattern Language (SP-OPL) proposed in [Falbo et al. 2013]. SPMOnt  includes  concepts,  relations  and  properties  related  to  scope,  time  and  costs planning  and execution. Regarding costs, currently,  only costs associated with human resources  are  considered.  Figure  1  shows  a  fragment  of  SPMOnt  with  some  of  the concepts  related  to  time  and  cost  planning  and  execution.  SPMOnt  is  represented  by using OntoUML, a UML profile that enables modelers to make finer-grained modeling distinctions  between  different  types  of  classes  and  relations  according  to  ontological distinctions put forth by the Unified Foundational Ontology [Guizzardi 2005].

There are two types of processes defined to a Project : General Project Process and Specific Project Process . The first one is the global process defined to the Project. It  is  composed  by  specific  process,  allowing  defining sub-processes .  Specific  Project Processes are composed by Project Activities , which can be Simple Project Activities or Composite Project Activities . Once a general project process is defined to a project, it  is  possible  to  plan  duration,  start  and  end  dates,  and  cost  of  the  process,  their  sub- processes and activities. The definition of duration, dates and cost to a Project Process gives  rise,  respectively,  to Process  with  Planned  Duration , Scheduled  Process and Process  with  Planned  Cost .  Similarly,  the  planning  of  duration,  dates  and  cost  of  a Project Activity gives rise to Activity with Planned Duration , Scheduled Activity and Activity with Planned Cost .

A Human Resource Allocation is the assignment of a Scheduled Activity to a Human  Resource to  perform  a Human  Role .  The  cost  of  a  Human  Resource Allocation is based on the cost of the allocated Human Resource, which is established in the Employment of that Human Resource.

A  Project  Activity  can  cause Activity  Occurrences ,  which  can  be Simple Activity Occurrences or Composite Activity  Occurrences . Human  Resource Participation refers to the participation of a Human  Resource  in  an  Activity Occurrence.

Figure 1 -A fragment of the Software Project Management Ontology

[FIGURE]

## 4.2 Supporting Project Management with Semantic Annotations in Spreadsheets

In  order  to  explore  the  use  of  semantic  annotation  to  support  project  management aspects, we first extended IMSD to work with spreadsheets and then we used SPMOnt as a basis to annotate spreadsheet templates related to the project management domain. The  annotations  are  added  into  the  templates  that,  when  instantiated,  give  rise  to semantic spreadsheets. Thus, once annotated the templates, the spreadsheets produced using them are also annotated and can be used as data sources to IMSD. Spreadsheet templates were developed using the Open Document Format [Oasis 2015], since it is an open  format,  with  great  span.  Specialized  annotations  for  cells  were  produced  using Open Document Spreadsheet (ODS) in LibreOffice Calc.

For  spreadsheets  annotation,  the  syntax  and  instructions  for  annotating  text fragments provided by IMSD are used to capture the cell content.   Instructions can be used to create instances, relations and properties based on the ontology. The syntax of the  instance  creation  instruction  is instance  (arg  ,concept,  accessVariable) .  This  instruction creates the instance arg of the concept of SPMOnt. The SPMOnt was implemented in OWL and  its  URL  is  also  informed  in  the concept field.  The  instruction  result  is  a reference to the created instance and it is set on the accessVariable for  later  use.  The syntax  to  create  a  relation  is property  (arg1,  prop,  arg2) .  This  instruction  establishes  a relation prop between the instances arg1 and arg2 . This instruction is also used to create properties and, in this case, it means that the value arg2 is set as the property prop of the instance arg1 .

For annotating templates and allowing the capture of the spreadsheets content by IMSD,  in  the  LibreOffice  Calc, Custom  Properties option  is  used  to  annotations recording  and Styles  and  Formatting option  is  used  to  allow  for  application  of annotations to cells. The first thing to do when creating a semantic template is to create a custom property named Semantic Document and set its value to True . This way, IMSD can  identify  that  the  spreadsheet  is  a  semantic  document  and  searches  for  semantic annotations. Each annotation must be recorded in a new custom property whose value is the annotation instruction. For each annotation, a formatting style must be created and it must be related to the custom property in which the annotation is recorded. Thus, when a formatting style is applied to a cell, the cell is annotated according to the annotation instruction recorded in the corresponding custom property.

Three templates related to project management were developed and annotated: WBS ,  which  is  a  text  document  that  describes  the  project  deliverables  and  work packages; Project Status Report (PSR), which is a spreadsheet that contains information regarding project planning and execution; and Human Resources Costs (HRC), which is a spreadsheet that provides information regarding the costs of human resources allocated to the project. Figure 2 shows the template of the Project Status Report , which contains information  about  project  activities,  dependencies,  human  resources  allocated  and participants,  WBS  items  related,  and  planned  and  executed  dates  and  duration.  As examples, the annotations related to cells of Human Resource and Duration columns are shown. The first part of the human resource annotation creates instances of the Human Resource concept and stores in hr variable. The second part establishes the relationship allocates between  instances  of  Human  Resource  and  an  instance  of  Activity,  like  in SPMOnt,  in  which  the  relation allocates connects  a  human  resource  to  an  activity, meaning  that  the  human  resource  is  allocated  to  perform  the  activity.  The break tag means that one or various human resources can be related to one activity and they are separated  by  comma.  In  duration  annotation,  the  tag completeText indicates  that  the instruction refers to the complete text stored in the cell. The instruction means that the cell content will be set as the property Planned Duration of an instance of Activity.

Figure 2 -Project Status Report template

[FIGURE]

The  spreadsheets  produced  using  the  annotated  templates  are  submitted  to IMSD, which extracts data from them and stores in OWL files, allowing searching and retrieval.  IMSD  also  performs  version  control  of  the  spreadsheets  and  notifies  users about  changes.  Annotation,  indexing,  storing,  retrieval,  version  control  and  changes notification are general functionalities, which can be applied to any domain.

We argue that project management aspects can be better supported by exploring the  conceptualization  provided  by  the  domain  ontology.  In  this  sense,  some  domainspecific  functionalities  were  identified  from  the  SPMOnt  concepts,  relations  and properties,  and  have  been  implemented  to  extend  IMSD: (i) the  dependency  relation between activities and between activities and WBS items (not shown in Figure 1) can be used to extract and relate data recorded in Project Status Reports and WBS document and  represent  them  in  dependency  matrices  that  are  useful  to  analyze  the  impact  of changes  in  the  project; (ii) the  relation  between  activities  and  project  cost  with  the human resource allocations cost can be explored to, based on activity duration, human resources  allocations  and  human  resources  costs,  define  the  project  budged; (iii) relationships between activities with planned duration/cost and the real duration/cost of the activity occurrences caused by them can be explored to track planned and executed values, determine their adherence, and also calculate Earned Value Analysis indicators and estimates about the project conclusion, helping project managers to understand the project progress, monitor it and make adjustments when necessary; and (iv) indicators calculated to several projects can be represented in graphics allowing project managers to have a global view of the projects and make comparisons among them.

## 5. Related Works

As discussed in Section 3, there are some initiatives involving semantic annotation that support project management aspects. There are some similarities between our work and the proposals found in the systematic review. However, there are also differences.

As for similarities, like IMSD, all proposals use domain ontologies as a basis to annotations  and  provide  general  features  for  managing  semantic  content  (annotation, storage, indexing and retrieving). Based on the semantic content, SKSS [Lu et al. 2008] creates a knowledge network of documents. Similarly, IMSD uses semantic content and creates graphs in which information recorded in documents are related one to another. CMIO [Nakatsuka and Ishida 2006] and IMSD send automatic emails notifying users about modifications on semantic documents.

The  main  differences  between  our  proposal  and  the  ones  found  in  the  SLR concern  the  types  of  annotated  files  and  the  project  management  knowledge  areas supported.  Regarding  types  of  files,  the  proposals  annotate  web  pages,  electronic forums, pdf and text documents. IMSD also annotates text documents, but it is the only one to annotate spreadsheets.

As for the knowledge areas supported, as discussed in Section 3, the proposals support aspects related to Scope, Integration, Communication and Stakeholder Management.  IMSD,  in  turn,  deals  with  aspects  related  to  Scope,  Time  and  Costs Management. Thus, IMSD differs from the cited proposals mainly due to the features to support project management activities, obtained by exploring the SPMOnt conceptualization  in  functionalities  that  help  managers  to  plan,  monitor  and  control projects.  Although the proposals support some project management aspects, the domain ontologies used do not address aspects that allow for comparing project planning and execution. Also, none proposal provides indicators or estimates to help project managers to monitor projects. Summarizing, by exploring the SPMOnt conceptualization, domainspecific features are provided by IMSD,  better supporting project  management activities.

## 6. Final Considerations

In this paper we discussed the use of semantic annotation in project management. The results of a systematic literature review that investigated initiatives that support project management aspects by using semantic annotation were presented. We also discussed an extension of the IMSD [Arantes and Falbo 2010] that enables it to semantically annotate spreadsheets with concepts, relations and properties of the Software Project Management Ontology to provide features supporting project planning and tracking.

At  this  moment,  we  are  concluding  the  implementation  of  the  ISMD  domainspecific functionalities. As future work, we plan to conduct experiments to evaluate the extension of IMSD in the project management domain. Moreover, we intend to integrate project  management  tools  (such  as  MS-Project)  with  documents  and  spreadsheets semantically annotated by IMSD. By doing this, organizations that use these tools can also benefit from IMSD functionalities. Finally, we intend to improve cost management features by considering costs relate to software, hardware and other cost elements that have not been currently considered.

## Acknowledgment

This  research  is  funded  by  the  Brazilian  Research  Funding  Agency  CNPq  (Processes 485368/2013-7 and 461777/2014-2).

## References

- ARANTES, L. O. and FALBO, R. A.  (2010)  "An infrastructure for managing semantic documents", In: Joint 5th International Workshop on Vocabularies, Ontologies and Rules  for  The  Enterprise  (VORTE)  -  International  Workshop  on  Metamodels, Ontologies and Semantic Technologies (MOST), p. 235-244.
- BRUGGEMANN,  B.  M.,  HOLZ,  K.-P.  and  MOLKENTHIN,  F.  (2000)    "Semantic documentation  in  engineering",  Eighth  International  Conference  on  Computing  in Civil and Building Engineering,  California, USA, p. 828-835.
- ERIKSSON, H. (2007) "The semantic-document approach to combining documents and ontologies", International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, v. 65, n. 7.
- ERIKSSON,  H.  and  BANG,  M.  (2006)    "Towards  document  repositories  based  on semantic  documents",  Sixth  International  Conference  on  Knowledge  Management and Knowledge Technologies (I-KNOW),  Graz, Austria, p. 313-320.
- FALBO, R. A.  et al. (2013)  "Organizing Ontology Design Patterns as Ontology Pattern Languages", 10th European Semantic Web Conference -ESWC 2013,  France, p. 61-75.
- FALBO,  R.  A.,  BRAGA,  C.  E.  C.  and  MACHADO,  B.  N.    (2014)    "Semantic Documentation in Requirements Engineering", In: 17th Workshop on Requirements Engineering (WER 2014), Pucón - Chile,
- GUIZZARDI, G. (2005) "Ontological Foundations for Structural Conceptual Models", University of Twente, The Netherlands.
- KIRYAKOV, A., POPOV, B. and TERZIEV, I. (2004) "Semantic annotation, indexing, and  retrieval",  Web  Semantics:  Science,  Services  and  Agents  on  the  World  Wide Web, v. 2, p. 49-79.
- KITCHENHAM, B. and CHARTERS, S. (2007) "Guidelines for performing systematic literature reviews in software engineering", (EBSE-2007-01)
- KITCHENHAM, B. A., BUDGEN, D. and BRERETON, O. P. (2011) "Using Mapping Studies  as  the  Basis  for  Further  Research  -  A  Participant-Observer  Case  Study", Information &amp; Software Technology, v. 53, n. 6, p. 638-651.
- LOUKIS, E. N. (2007) "An ontology for G2G collaboration in public policy making, implementation and evaluation", Artificial Intelligence and Law, v. 15, n. 1, p. 19-48.
- LU,  Q.,  CHEN,  M.  and  WANG,  Z.    (2008)    "A  semantic  annotation  based  software knowledge sharing space", In: IFIP International Conference on Network and Parallel Computing (NPC), China, p. 504 - 509.
- NAKATSUKA,  K.  and  ISHIDA,  T.  (2006) "Content management for interorganizational projects using e-mail metaphor", International Symposium on Applications and the Internet (SAINT),  Phoenix, Arizona, USA, p. 202-205.
- OASIS. Open Document Format for Office Applications.   Visited in: July, 9th 2015, https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/tc\_home.php?wg\_abbrev=office.
- PMI (2013), A guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBoK), Project Management Institute, 5.
- PRESSMAN, R. S. (2011), Engenharia de Software, McGraw Hill, 7th edition.
- SICILIA, M.  (2006) "Metadata, semantics and ontology: providing meaning  to information resources", International Journal of Metadata, Semantics and Ontologies, v. 1, n. 1, p. 83-86.
- TALAŠ, J., GREGAR, T. and PITNER, T. (2010)  "Semantically enriched tools for the knowledge  society:  case  of  project  management  and  presentation",  Third  World Summit on the Knowledge Society,  Greece, p. 322-328
- UREN, V. et al. (2006) "Semantic annotation for knowledge management: requirements and a survey of the state of the art", Journal of Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4, p. 14-28.
- VILLALOBOS,  J.,  SANABRIA,  S.  and  CACERES,  R.  (2011)  "Activity  scheduling through gantt charts in an ms excel spreadsheet", Revista Facultad de Ingenieria, n. 61, p. 132-145.
- WEBSTER,  J.  and  WATSON,  R.  T.  (2002)  "Analyzing  the  Past  to  Prepare  for  the Future: Writing a Literature Review", MIS Quarterly, v. 26, n. 2, p. 13-23.
