[FIGURE]

## An Ontological Analysis of Digital Technology

[FIGURE]

Silvia Bogea Gomes 1,2( B ) , Flavia Maria Santoro 3 , and Miguel Mira da Silva 1

1

[FIGURE]

Instituto Superior Tecnico, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal silvia.bogea@inov.pt, mms@tecnico.ulisboa.pt 2 INOV INESC Inovacao, Lisbon, Portugal 3 Institute of Technology and Leadership, Sao Paulo, Brasil

flavia@inteli.edu.br

Abstract. In a growing number of industries, digitalization enables new value co-creation, leading to innovative changes in the economy and society. Digitalization arises from the Information Technology domain, blending and encapsulating digital technologies' transformational effects. Digital technologies are fundamental components for organizations to transform digitally; therefore, what is digital technology? It is a type of technology involving one or more digital objects whose components include one or more bitstrings. The Theory of Digital Objects proposes to capture digital objects' ontological complexity and understand how their identity and usage are bound up with a 'dual nature' constituting physical form and social function. This paper presents an ontological analysis of this theory, grounded on the Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO), using OntoUML to identify the core components to answer what digital technology is. The analysis adds ontological clarity to the Theory of Digital Objects.

Keywords: Theory of digital objects · UFO · OntoUML · Digital Technology

## 1 Introduction

Organizations are increasingly confronted with the need to respond and adapt to changes creatively, to remain profitable and develop sustainable competitive advantages. Many will cease to exist unless they keep up with technological trends. In a growing number of industries, digitalization enables new value co-creation, leading to changes in the economy and society. Digitalization arises from the Information Technology (IT) environment, blending in and encapsulating digital technologies' transformational effects [1]. IT is a collective term for various technologies involved in the processing and transmission of information, including computing, telecommunications, and microelectronics [2].

IT has enabled human actors, Information Systems, and innovative products to interact via multiple digital channels. Since the 1990s, the Information Systems domain extended the concept of business transformation from IT-enabled to transformations where IT is part of core business [3]. Currently, Information Systems are making and shaping the physical reality from a digital version of reality. This ontological reversal has many implications for the role of humans and technology in society [4]. In a digital world, human digital technology experiences can be mediated entirely or partially by four dimensions: time, place, artifacts, and actors [5].

Digital technology has been associated with trendy technologies, such as cloud, wearables, mobile devices, social media, business analytics, the Internet of things (IoT), and Artificial Intelligence (AI) [6-8]. The term digital technology was already used before the World Wide Web (better known as the Web) and the Internet. Everyday activities increasingly leverage digital technologies for personal and professional purposes, in organizational and non-organizational contexts. Digital technologies are fundamental components for organizations to digitally transform themselves. Literature has discussed the unique characteristics or properties of digital technologies: that offer opportunities to create new infrastructures, products, and business models, reshaping organizations [9]. Moreover, many efforts have been made to comprehensively understand digital technologies [4, 5, 10-15].

Faulkner and Runde's theory [15] provides a clear and complete explanation in ontological terms; thus, we took this theory as starting point and applied an ontological analysis grounded on the Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO) [16-18] and using OntoUML [19], to identify the digital technology core components, making explicit connections, disambiguating collapsed concepts, and clarifying underspecified aspects. In this context, we aim to answer the Research Question: What is digital technology?

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Sect. 2 presents the literature review; Sect. 3 outlines the Theory of Digital Objects, Sect. 4 introduces the Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO) and OntoUML; Sect. 5 exhibits the unified digital technology conceptualization underlying the Theory of Digital Objects; Sect. 6 discusses the ontological analysis results; and Sect. 7 concludes the paper.

## 2 Literature Review

The core concepts related to digital technology theories, ontologies, or conceptual frameworks identified in a literature review were consolidated in Fig. 1.

Yoo [5] describes digital artifacts as everyday artifacts with embedded computing capabilities. Digital artifact is one of the four dimensions of human experiences through digital technology, the other three being: time, space, and actors. Furthermore, the layered modular architecture extends the modular architecture of physical products by incorporating four loosely coupled layers: the devices, networks, services, and contents created by digital technology [11]. Digital artifacts vary in the processes, they mediate and how they are qualified as objects. Hence why, for [10], a digital artifact is a quasi-object, considering it can exist in more than one similar but distinct implementation.

Digital artifacts differ from physical objects and other cultural records (e.g., art objects, paper-based files) by their non-digital constitution, along several dimensions [12]. These differences confer to the digital objects a distinctive functional profile. These authors subsume all digital technologies, devices, and digital cultural artifacts such as music, video, and image under the category of digital objects .

These theories provide a useful conceptual grid for studying social practices and identifying the peculiar generativity and instability that digital objects introduce - across various settings and situations. Digital artifacts such as files, images, and films or videos are considered fluid and editable, often embedded in complex, distributed, and shifting digital environments [10, 12], although [13] argued that the term digital artifact is a mean of theorizing the mentioned incompleteness. They are objects, yet they lack the plenitude and stability afforded by traditional items and devices.

Fig. 1. The selected theories' main concepts.

[FIGURE]

Digital objects are approached through the concept of 'relations' with the material and the temporal relations, contrasting digital objects with natural objects (e.g., apples) and technical objects (e.g., hammers). They are abstract entities, such as information and data. As a technical object, a technical individual supports its inner structure functioning since it can adapt to an external milieu (i.e., a person's social environment) with its functioning. The main attributes that characterize the digital object are bits, digital information, and process. The related concepts are natural and technical objects [20].

Faulkner and Runde [14] state that a technological object is a type of object that is a structured continuant. Structured means it is composed of distinct parts and organized in some way. Continuant means it is fully present at every point the time during which it exists. Since the technological objects are not agents, they do not have practices like human agents, although they occupy social positions. They also are not self-reflexive and cannot exercise conscious choices. The identity of technological objects is defined with a focus on the immaterial status of digital artifacts, their reproducibility (meager marginal cost), recombinability, and non-rival nature, likewise the ways these attributes are implicated in the innovation of products and services [14, 15, 21, 22].

The Theory of Digital Objects [15] organizes an object's conception into two perspectives: the bearers of nonmaterial objects and the social positioning of digital objects. Digital objects are, therefore, distinct from other kinds of entities, such as events. The digital objects' identity and system functions flow from their social positioning in the communities where they arise [15]. They focus on bearers of nonmaterial technological objects, where digital objects qua objects, i.e., all digital objects, are objects.

Digital artifacts are reprogrammable and self-referential entities whose distinct functional makeup is closely tied to data homogenization (or digitization), critical in enabling digital artifacts to develop innovative properties [5, 11, 14, 15, 21, 22]. As digital artifacts diffuse, these properties become involved in making modular and multilayered digital infrastructures, that instantiate the independence of services from devices and content from the underlying networks [11]. Such condition opens the potential for innovation, enabling the mixing of inputs/outputs across the traditional and usually fixed industry borders associated with standard physical products, and vertical integration. Furthermore, the classical view of an information system that represents and reflects physical reality is increasingly obsolete: digital technologies are now creating and shaping physical reality [4]. They call this phenomenon ontological reversal , where the digital version is created first and the physical version second (if needed).

We decided to use the Theory of Digital Objects from [15] since they present a clearer and more complete solution in ontological terms. In the next section, the terms highlighted in italic correspond to the theory entities [14, 15, 21, 22].

## 3 Theorizing Digital Objects

The Theory of Digital Objects [15] is centered around an object's conception, positioning, and identifying technological objects in a community, and surfacing the hidden assumptions about how technology implicates human activities. A technological object is any object with one or more uses assigned to it by the members of some (human) community. Moreover, technology is composed of technological objects.

Anobject can be categorized as either material or nonmaterial. Material objects , such as scanners and smartphones, refer to an object's physical mode of being. Nonmaterial objects have a non-physical existence, examples include articles, operating systems, software, and conceptual schemes.

A material object can be a bearer of a nonmaterial object . Material bearers are vital for practical engagement with nonmaterial objects : a nonmaterial object must be born on a material object to be accessed. For example, for a digital book to be read by a human being, it must be displayed on a suitable material object , like a tablet. Similarly, if that digital book needs to be archived, it must be held on an appropriate material object . The nonmaterial object is distinct from all these material objects owningparticular attributes. For instance, where an object serves as a material bearer to archive a nonmaterial object , properties such as durability and portability are likely to be essential attributes of the material object concerned. The hybrid refers to objects that comprise both material and nonmaterial objects as component parts [15].

A nonmaterial object (e.g., a computer program) is born from (or contained within) some syntactic object (e.g., computer language). In this case, we can call any syntactic object in which a nonmaterial object is born (or contained) a nonmaterial bearer of that nonmaterial object . Faulkner and Runde [15] consider syntactic objects as the most important category of nonmaterialobjects for their purposes; the syntactic objects consist of symbols arranged into well-formed expressions, i.e., these expressions adhere to the syntactical and semantic rules of the language in which they are couched. For example, manuals, and contracts are syntactic objects in natural language, while musical notation, Morse code, and mathematics are syntactic objects in artificial languages.

Any syntactic entity satisfies the two criteria for nonmaterial objecthood: it is an object and has a non-physical mode of being. In a syntactic object such as a novel, the componentparts are letters and punctuation marks arranged to form words and sentences. Syntactic objects are ubiquitous in the digital world, and one type of them stands out as fundamental: the bitstring [15].

A bitstring is a type of syntactic object made up of bits, which are the 0s and 1s employed in a binary numbering system, where these bits are structured according to an appropriate file format to be readable by the computer hardware for which they are intended. Bitstrings , often called computer files, are one of the cornerstones of the digital revolution since the information stored and manipulated by computers, in general, is encoded in bitstrings. Bitstrings are divided into two categories: program files (PF) (e.g., operating systems, applications, browsers, smartphone apps, and games) and data files (DF) (e.g., documents, videos, and audio recordings) [15].

Digital objects are ones that component parts include one or more bitstrings . Digital objects are components' structured ensembles, themselves objects. As a type of object, digital objects inherit the objects' characteristics ( material and nonmaterial objects ). Digital hybrids acquire the physical mode of their material components. In general, digital objects have community-dependent aspects (e.g., the same platform can be used for e-learning and business meetings) rather than intrinsic aspects.

A technological object is any object that has one or more uses assigned to it by members of some human community , besides having a 'dual nature' in that it is constituted of both the &lt;&lt; physical form &gt;&gt; and the &lt;&lt; social function &gt;&gt; [14]. Regarding the 'dual nature', its physical form is crucial for the functions assigned to it. Those objects (e.g., a book) must generally possess the physical characteristics and capabilities required to perform the functions concerned. For their new forms (e.g., an e-book) or cases in which existing technological objects are used in a new way (e.g., phone as a smartphone), the group assigning the function may initially be very small, including no more than those responsible for the innovations concerned [21].

Furthermore, the context-dependent aspects, such as how the digital objects look (smartphones, banking apps) depend on their social positioning [15]. A social position is a specific status within a system, that locates its occupant as a system's component. Any entity's social identity is the entity's kind of object according to its occupied social position . Social positions typically exist independently of, and usually before, any individual occupant. The technological object identity's definition can be used to pinpoint digital objects . For example, the social networking personal profile's identity, a technological object , is a digital object , as it is assigned to a community (e.g., LinkedIn).

## 4 UFO and OntoUML

The Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO) [16-18] is an axiomatic formal theory based on contributions from Formal Ontology in Philosophy, Philosophical Logics, Cognitive Psychology, and Linguistics. It is the second-most used foundational ontology in conceptual modeling and the one with the fastest adoption rate [23].

OntoUML [19] is a language whose meta-model has been designed to comply with the ontological distinctions and axiomatization of UFO. It is among the most widely used languages in ontology-driven conceptual modeling, together with UML, (E)ER, OWL and BPMN. A brief explanation of a selected subset of the ontological distinctions set out by UFO is given below, together with how these distinctions are represented by the modelling primitives of OntoUML (as a UML profile). In this work, the terms highlighted in bold correspond to the UFO entities and those between «brackets» to OntoUML stereotypes.

UFOconsists of three main modules: UFO-A theory synthesizes the Endurants (i.e.: objects, continuants); UFO-B comprises an ontology of Events (i.e.: events, processes, states); and UFO-C is an ontology of intentional and social entities, which is constructed on top of UFO-A and UFO-B, and addresses notions such as Beliefs, Desires, Intentions, Goals, Actions, Social Roles and Social Relators and others [19]. It starts by making a fundamentaldistinction between endurants and events . Endurants are entities that exist in time and can change qualitatively, while maintaining their identity. Events , in contrast, are entities that unfold in time, accumulating temporal parts (e.g., a football game, a speech). Endurants are further divided into substantials and aspects . Substantials are existentially independent entities such as apples, and a person.

Substantials can be either agents or objects . An agent is a substantial that creates actions, perceives events, and to which we can ascribe mental states (intentional moments). Agents can be physical (e.g., a person) or social (e.g., an organization). A human agent is a type of physical agent. An object is a substantial which is unable to perceive events or have intentional moments. Objects can also be further categorized into physical (e.g., a book, a car) and social objects (e.g., money, language) [18]. Collectives («Collective») of agents or objects (e.g., a project team, a deck of cards) have uniform structures and contain other Endurants as members («memberOf»).

## 5 Theory of Digital Objects in OntoUML

The ontological function of a conceptual model is to provide conceptual clarification and unambiguous communication [24]. The model should reconstruct the intended conceptualization (set of possible interpretations) and be explicit and transparent with its ontological semantics. Revealing the ontological semantics of an information artifact is a fundamental type of explanation for symbolic models (including conceptual models).

Wepresent an ontological analysis of the conceptualization underlying the Theory of Digital Objects using OntoUML. The result of this analysis is captured in an integrated model, comprising the digital object and its technical identity (see Fig. 2). We applied the generally accepted color-coding scheme from OntoUML. Moreover, in the diagram, we highlighted the entities from UFO [16] and TDO (Theorizing Digital Objects) [15], starting the name of the class with 'UFO:' or 'TDO:' or both.

Faulkner and Runde [15] provide a framework that considers material , nonmaterial , and hybrid objects in a unified way, looking at digital phenomena and their potential. It informs the existing perspectives on theorizing digital technology per se and the relationship between people and digital technology . It considers the computation' role and how the object's technical identity and object's functions fl ow from their social positioning in the communities in which they arise. They [15] focus on the digital objects' conception and a bearer theory of how material and nonmaterial objects combine.

In UFO, Guizzardi et al. [18] consider an object as a substantial, not able to perceive events or have intentional moments that can be further categorized into physical and social objects . According to Markosian [25], objects from different ontological categories, such as physical, non-physical, propositions, and universals, all exist in time; however, not all of them exist in space. The ones that exist in both time and space are the ones that count as physical objects . Markosian [25], like us, assumes that the expressions physical object (as defined in UFO) and material object (as defined in TDO) are synonymous. A nonmaterial object (TDO) can be a type of social object (UFO).

The organizational consequences of technology cannot be fully understood without a reference to this framework. For example, understanding the organizational consequences of blockchain requires knowing about the properties of (nonmaterial) data structures, cryptographic keys, consensus mechanism protocols, and the material infrastructure elements required to maintain a geographically distributed ledger.

Thetechnical identity of a technological object within some community is constituted by its function and structure , which is beneficial to the community's interests. Structured means an object composed of several distinct parts (component parts), organized in some way. Since a community collectively assigns functions, those functions are never intrinsic to the objects concerned and are therefore always necessarily community relative. To sustain the function assigned to a technological object , it must generally possess the characteristics and capabilities required to perform it [22].

According to [14], technical identities might reside at different levels of abstraction, including nested technical identities . For example: networks monitoring iPhone applications are members of a broader class of iPhone applications, and those are themselves members of an even broader class of application software. An application such as Google Translate derives its identity, not only from the structures of the bitstrings comprising it, but also from the function assigned to those bitstrings, in this case, to translate text, documents, and websites from one language into another. Technological objects of a given technical identity often vary in the details of their structures. However, despite their diversity, people can still identify different objects as tokens of the same type of technological device. Thus, while Google Translate, Microsoft Translator, and their various competitors contrast somewhat in their structures, they share sufficient commonalities to be grouped as online translators.

It is also possible that similar or even identical objects mayhavecontrastingfunctions assigned to them, to such an extent that the same object may have radically different technical identities in different communities. This is more likely to occur to intermediate products - further upstream in the manufacturing process -, for example, in the case of the gramophone turntable becoming a musical instrument in specific communities [21].

Modeling this theory in OntoUML demonstrated that digital technologies have the &lt;&lt; participation &gt;&gt; of digital objects that are, in turn, objects characterized by some capabilities required to perform specific functions of this technological object . Finally, we answer (RQ1) What is digital technology? Digital technology is the technical identity of a digital object , its type of use assigned by a community, and its social functions. Digital objects are a type of technological object constituted by component parts , including one or more bitstrings . Bitstrings, a nonmaterial object , can be beared by a material object or remain as a nonmaterial bearer. A nonmaterial bearer can be one of the various kinds of nonmaterial objects corresponding to the diverse kinds of information employed in computing. A digital object has a technical identity mediated by its structure and social function .

Fig. 2. Digital Object and their Technical Identity in OntoUML.

[FIGURE]

## 6 Discussion

The conception of digital objects and the novel 'bearer' theory, of how material and nonmaterial objects combine, is part of the Theory of Digital Objects [15]. This theory considers the computation's role as the digital objects' identity and functions and their social positioning in the communities they arise from. However, focusing on the digital object alone can mask the complexity of the digital technological domain, when concepts have a rich semantic structure. The ontological unpacking provided a detailed analysis of the complex notions hidden within the digital object and was essential for acquiring a deep understanding of the domain. The ontological analysis aims to support the digital object's conceptual aspect to facilitate the technology's understanding. It leads to the following advantages:

Making Connections Explicit. The Theory of Digital Objects represents the concept of the resource from three perspectives of viewing resources: resource-based (i.e., material, physical, objects), knowledge-based (i.e., social worlds, social rules, relations), and service-dominant logic (i.e., operand as machinery, operant as competences). The different perspectives are relevant for distinguishing between distinct kinds of resources

(especially the nonmaterial and fluid nature of certain types of resources). The problems these authors identified represent the weaknesses in conceptualizing digital technology in IS research. Grounding this theory in UFO and OntoUML makes those concepts and relationships explicit.

Unpacking Process Information. The Theory of Digital Objects does not explicitly state the intentions that motivate the creation and use of digital objects, which could confuse the type of participation of digital object usage. In ontological terms, it is clear that the selection of digital technology depends on the intentions of digital object usage, which impacts both the selection of digital technology and its components, and the clear definition of the intended uses.

Disambiguating Collapsed Concepts. The concepts of digital artifact, technological object, and digital object are used in different works related to digital technology. We define each of these concepts as a result of our literature review, relating them to digital technology and consistently using them.

Clarifying Underspecified Aspects. The Theory of Digital Objects includes all the information about what characterizes the digital objects (material, nonmaterial, syntactic, bitstring, technical identity) but does not consider the intentions that determine the choice of a set of digital objects. It is important to interpret the intention correctly, as we need objects with functions that can fulfill the intention. For example, the required objects could be more than just an e-learning software to have online classes. The digital technology choice is assigned considering what is demanded of the objects and agents (including artificial agents) - for example, the functions and capabilities - as determined by a community.

## 7 Conclusion

In this paper, we analyzed the Theory of Digital Objects, that offers an object-based definition of digital objects able to explain why digital objects are specifically digital, covering both hardware and nonmaterial objects. We conducted an ontological analysis to unpack and identify the core components of the Theory of Digital Objects. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of this conceptual model and the usefulness of unpacking a model to conceptualize digital technology. Future research will aggregate digital technology, its roles, and its impacts on Digital Transformation Ontology [1].

## References

1. Gomes, S.B., Santoro, F.M., da Silva, M.M.: An ontology for BPM in digital transformation and innovation. Int. J. Inf. Syst. Model. Des. 11 , 52-77 (2020)
2. Nyamboga, C.M., Kemparaju, T.D.: Information technology in university libraries in Karnataka. Inf. Dev. 18 , 257-265 (2002)
3. Baiyere, A., Salmela, H., Tapanainen, T.: Digital transformation and the new logics of business process management. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 29 , 238-259 (2020)

4. Baskerville, R.L., Myers, M.D., Yoo, Y.: Digital first: the ontological reversal and new challenges for information systems research. MIS Q. 44 , 509-523 (2020)
5. Yoo, Y.: Computing in everyday life: a call for research on experiential computing. MIS Q. Manag. Inf. Syst. 34 , 213-231 (2010)
6. Sedera, D., Lokuge, S.: Do we put all eggs in one basket? a polynomial regression study of digital technology configuration strategies. In: 40th International Conference on Information Systems, ICIS 2019 (2019)
7. Arbaiza, C.E.S.: Critical variables for success in the technology adoption process in the framework of digital transformation. In: ACM International Conference on Proceeding Series, pp. 109-113 (2018)
8. Berger, S., Bitzer, M., Häckel, B., V oit, C.: Approaching digital transformation - development of a multi-dimensional maturity model. In: ECIS 2020 Proceedings, pp. 1-18 (2020)
9. [Drechsler, K., Gregory, R., Wagner, H.T., Tumbas, S.: At the crossroads between digital innovation and digital transformation. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 47 , 521-538 (2020). https:// doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.04723](https://doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.04723)
10. Ekbia, H.R.: Digital artifacts as quasi-objects: qualification, mediation, and materiality. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 60 , 2554-2566 (2009)
11. Yoo, Y., Henfridsson, O., Lyytinen, K.: The new organizing logic of digital innovation: an agenda for information systems research. Inf. Syst. Res. 21 , 724-735 (2010)
12. Kallinikos, J., Aaltonen, A., Marton, A.: A theory of digital objects. First Monday 15 , 1-28 (2010)
13. Kallinikos, J., Aaltonen, A., Marton, A.: The ambivalent ontology of digital artifacts. MIS Q. 37 , 357-370 (2013)
14. Faulkner, P., Runde, J.: Technology objects, social positions and the tranformational model of social activity. MiS Quaterly. 37 , 803-818 (2013)
15. Faulkner, P., Runde, J.: Theorizing the digital object. MIS Q. 43 , 1278-1302 (2019)
16. Guizzardi, G.: Ontological foundations for structural conceptual models (2005)
17. Benevides, A.B., Bourguet, J.R., Guizzardi, G., Peñaloza, R., Almeida, J.P.A.: Representing a reference foundational ontology of events in SROIQ. Appl. Ontol. 14 , 293-334 (2019)
18. de Oliveira Bringuente, A.C., de Almeida Falbo, R., Guizzardi, G.: Using a foundational ontology for reengineering a software process ontology. J. Inf. Data Manag. 2 , 511 (2011)
19. Guizzardi, G., Wagner, G., Almeida, J.P.A., Guizzardi, R.S.S.: Towards ontological foundations for conceptual modeling: the unified foundational ontology (UFO) story. Appl. Ontol. 10 , 259-271 (2015)
20. Hui, Y.: What is a digital object? Metaphilosophy 43 , 380-395 (2012)
21. Faulkner, P., Runde, J.: On the identity of technological objects and user innovations in function. Acad. Manag. Rev. 34 , 442-462 (2009)
22. Faulkner, P., Runde, J.: The social, the material, and the ontology of non-material technological objects. In: European Group for Organizational Studies (EGOS) Colloquium, Gothenburg, pp. 1-34. Citeseer (2011)
23. Verdonck, M., Gailly, F.: Insights on the use and application of ontology and conceptual modeling languages in ontology-driven conceptual modeling. In: Comyn-Wattiau, I., Tanaka, K., Song, I.-Y., Yamamoto, S., Saeki, M. (eds.) ER 2016. LNCS, vol. 9974, pp. 83-97. Springer, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-46397-1\_7
24. Guizzardi, G., Bernasconi, A., Pastor, O., Storey, V .C.: Ontological unpacking as explanation: the case of the viral conceptual model. In: Ghose, A., Horkoff, J., Silva Souza, V .E., Parsons, J., Evermann, J. (eds.) ER 2021. LNCS, vol. 13011, pp. 356-366. Springer, Cham (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-89022-3\_28
25. Markosian, N.: What are physical objects? Philos. Phenomenol. Res. 61 , 375-395 (2000)
