This article is published online with Open Access by IOS Press and distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC 4.0). doi:10.3233/978-1-61499-910-2-239

## SAREF4health: IoT Standard-Based Ontology-Driven Healthcare Systems

João MOREIRA a,1 , Luís FERREIRA PIRES a , Marten van SINDEREN a , Laura DANIELE b

a University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands b

TNO, Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research

Abstract. Recently,  a  number  of  ontology-driven  healthcare  systems  have  been leveraged by the Internet-of-Things (IoT) technologies, which offer opportunities to  improve  patient  monitoring  and  abnormal  situation  detection  with  support  of medical  wearables  and  cloud  infrastructure.  Usually,  these  systems  rely  on  IoT ontologies  to  represent  sensor  data  observations.  The  ETSI  Smart  Appliances REFerence (SAREF) IoT ontology is an extensible industry-oriented standard. In this paper, we discuss the verbosity problem of SAREF when used for real-time electrocardiography  (ECG),  emphasizing  the  requirement  of  representing  time series.  We  compared  the  main  ontologies  in  this  context  according  to  quality, message size (payload), IoT-orientation and standardization. We also introduce a SAREF4health extension to tackle  the  verbosity  problem.  In  the  SAREF4health development  we  followed  ontology-driven  conceptual  modelling,  in  which  an ECG ontology grounded in the Unified Foundational Ontology (UFO) plays the role  of  a  reference  model.  The  methodology  was  enhanced  by  a  standardization procedure  and  considers  the  RDF  serialization  of  the  HL7  Fast  Healthcare Interoperability  Resources  (FHIR)  standard.  The  validation  of  SAREF4health includes  the  use  cases  of  an  early  warning  system  that  uses  ECG  data  to  detect accidents with truck drivers in a port area. A prototype that integrates an existing ECG wearable with cloud infrastructure demonstrates the performance impact of SAREF4health considering IoT constraints. Our results show that SAREF4health is  adequate to enable semantic interoperability of IoT solutions that need to deal with frequency-based time series. Design decisions regarding the trade-off between ontology quality and aggregation representation are also discussed.

Keywords. ontology-driven  healthcare  system,  Internet  of  Things,  ontologydriven conceptual modelling, health ontology, SAREF. ECG monitoring

## 1. Introduction

In the past years, a number of ontology-driven e-health solutions, improved with IoT  technologies,  were  proposed  [2,9,15].  Current  IoT  electrocardiography  (ECG  or EKG)  approaches  use  medical  wearables  and  cloud  infrastructure  for  real  time monitoring of cardiac behaviour [1-3], which  improves patient monitoring for automatic identification of abnormal situations.

Usually, these systems rely on IoT ontologies to represent sensor data observations. In this context, several ontology-based IoT approaches have been proposed [4, 5], from which  the  Smart  Appliances  REFerence  (SAREF)  ontology  is  an  extensible  IoT

1 Corresponding Author.

reference ontology developed in close connection with the IoT industry [6]. SAREF is standardized  by  the  European  Telecommunications  Standards  Institute  (ETSI)  and includes extensions, e.g., smart energy, environment (SAREF4envi) and buildings [7], being considered by the European Commission as 'a first ontology standard in the IoT ecosystem and sets a template and a base for development of similar standards for the other verticals to unlock the full potential of IoT' [7].

In  this  paper,  we  address  the  verbosity  problem  of  SAREF  messages  in  IoT scenarios of real-time electrocardiography (ECG), where data needs to be represented as  frequency-based  time  series  of  measurements  observed  by  sensors.  We  present  a study  that  compares  the  main  semantic  models  in  this  context,  according  to  four characteristics: quality, message size (payload), IoT-orientation and standardization. To address the verbosity problem, we introduce SAREF4health, an extension of SAREF leveraged  by  ontology-driven  conceptual  modelling,  in  which  an  ECG  ontology grounded  in  the  Unified  Foundational  Ontology  (UFO)  plays  the  role  of  reference model. The approach combines the method of ontology-driven conceptual modelling with  standardization  initiatives,  e.g.,  HL7  Fast  Healthcare  Interoperability  Resources (FHIR), and best practices for RDF implementation of stream data.

In the first part of the SAREF4health validation, instances of SAREF4health were created and competency questions were answered with SPARQL queries. In the second part of the validation, we measured performance through a prototype that simulates use cases of an IoT early warning system (EWS) monitoring ECG data to detect accidents with truck drivers in a port area. Finally, we discuss the trade-offs regarding the impact of design decisions and ontology quality.

Section  2  presents  some  background  on  standardization  initiatives  for  semantic interoperability  in  IoT  domain,  IoT  solutions  for  ECG  monitoring  and  healthcare semantic  models.  Section  3  describes  the  SAREF  verbosity  problem.  Section  4 describes  the  SAREF4health  development  and  validation.  Section  5  summarizes  our contributions, lessons learned and future work.

## 2. Background

## 2.1. Standards for IoT semantic interoperability

Among the numerous IoT ontologies proposed in the literature, the W3C Semantic Sensor Network (SSN/SOSA)  and  the  ETSI SAREF  are  the most prominent approaches [4, 5], which were rigorously developed during many years by ontologists and  domain  experts,  being  applied  in  several  IoT  use  cases  and  supported  by standardization initiatives. SSN/SOSA and SAREF are aligned with each other [8]. In particular,  SAREF  is  pointed  by  the  EC  as  the  main  reference  IoT  ontology  that provides  an  extensible  characteristic  based  on  an  ETSI  procedure  to  standardize extensions of SAREF for vertical markets [7]. The motivation behind SAREF was that the  market  would  continue  to  be  too  fragmented  and  powerless  without  a  (protocolindependent)  semantic  layer  that  enables  interoperability  among  the  various  smart appliances  from  different  manufacturers.  To  that  end,  SAREF  was  created  with  the intention  to  interconnect  different  platforms,  supporting  the  data  exchange  with different protocols.

To  avoid  semantic  interoperability  issues  when  extending  SAREF,  an  ETSI standard procedure should be followed whenever a SAREF extension is submitted for acceptance. This procedure is based on the following best practices: (1) the extension is designed  according  to  clarity,  coherence,  extensibility,  minimal  encoding  bias  and minimal ontological  commitment  criteria;  (2)  relevant  stakeholders  in  the  domain  of interest should be involved in its development process; (3) the group/community that creates  the  extension  should  be  committed  to  contribute  to  its  maintenance;  (4)  it should not add concepts that are already present in SAREF or other extensions; (5) it needs to be properly documented and published.

## 2.2. IoT solutions for electrocardiography (ECG)

Several  solutions  for  ECG  are  leveraged  by  IoT  technologies  for  real  time monitoring of cardiac behaviour [1-3]. For example, modern ECG units can transmit the records of the electrical signals measured  from  the  skin through wireless communications  (e.g.  Bluetooth),  and  are  becoming  smaller,  more  comfortable  and energy-efficient.  Real-time  outpatient  ECG  monitoring  is  known  as  mobile  cardiac telemetry [9] and  can stream data continuously to caregivers, enabling the immediate alarm upon an abnormal situation detected, which can be implemented through an early warning system (EWS) [10].

We  have  been  developing  an  EWS  within  the  INTER-IoT-EWS  project  [11], which requires the detection of emergencies and risks of accidents with truck drivers wearing the Shimmer3 ECG unit 2  while they are transporting goods in a port area. The goal is to decrease the risk of fatal accidents at the port, improving health prevention and enabling quick reaction. Non-functional requirements include the semantic integration of IoT assets, e.g., devices, gateways, brokers and applications. Functional requirements include the real-time detection of arrhythmia (bradycardia and tachycardia) from ECG data provided by the ECG device and the detection of vehicle collision/impact by processing the cross-axial function (x 2 + y 2 + z 2 ) of instantaneous tri-axial acceleration data, similarly to Fall-MobileGuard [12].

## 2.3. Semantic health data

Open Biological and Biomedical Ontology (OBO) Foundry is a popular ontologydriven  initiative  in  the  biomedical  informatics  field,  which  provides  a  number  of domain  ontologies  leveraged  by  the  Basic  Formal  Ontology  (BFO),  a  foundational ontology. For example, OBO provides the Eagle-I Resource Ontology, which includes several  terms  for  health-related  instruments  and  protocols,  such  as  ECG  monitoring device 3 . SNOMED CT 4  and LOINC 5  are other relevant ontology-based approaches for clinical  health  terminologies,  since  they  define  terms  like  ECG  voltage  and  ECG abnormal finding.

A well-founded ECG ontology (UFO ECG) [13] was designed with support of an ontological  analysis  of  existing  health  standards  and  ontology-driven  conceptual modelling with UFO. The main goal of UFO ECG is to serve as a reference 'unified Electronic  Health  Record  (EHR)  model',  providing  mappings  to  the  three  most common  standards  that  support  the  representation  of  ECG  data,  including  the  HL7

2  http://www.shimmersensing.com/products/ecg-development-kit

3  http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ERO\_0000835

4  http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/SNOMEDCT

5 http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/LOINC

annotated ECG standard (HL7 aECG) [14]. The use of HL7 v3 along with IEEE1451 in embedded devices to achieve end to end semantic interoperability on health systems is exploited in [15]. The HL7 aECG [16] is one of these standards, which was chosen by the  US  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  for  clinical  trials,  implemented  as  a common  lexicon  approach,  i.e.,  using  XML  schemas,  running  nowadays  in  several hospital information systems. A review of ECG storage formats can be found in [17], which also includes SCP-ECG and DICOM. This review concludes that aECG inherits the  verbosity  of  XML,  since  it  produces  large  messages  (25  times  larger  than  a compressed approach), so that it may only be used in clinical drug trials and presents conceptual design issues that hinder its instantiation.

HL7  Fast  Healthcare  Interoperability  Resources  (FHIR)  is  an  emerging  open standard  that  is  considered  as  the  evolution  of  the  HL7  standards  for  the  new generation of health data exchange. HL7 FHIR defines a collection of 'resources' (data model elements) that can be mixed and adapted for particular clinical contexts through the 'profiling' process. Along with W3C semantic web community, HL7 developed an RDF representation of the FHIR data model, which can be described and validated with Shape Expressions (ShEx) [18].

The central FHIR element is the Observation resource 6 ,  which is used to support diagnosis  and  monitor  progress,  and  is  recommended  for  monitoring  vital  signs  and device  measurements.  In  particular,  the  'EKG  example  using  Sampled  Data' 7 demonstrates how to serialize ECG data using the Observation resource, which offers the property valueSampledData , responsible to represent the ECG sample sequence as a  series  of  measurements  of  the  heart  electrical  activity  through  the SampledData element, similarly to HL7 aECG. A SampledData provides a concise way to handle the data produced by devices that sample a particular physical state at a high frequency. A typical use for this is to represent the output of an ECG device. The data type includes a  series  of  raw  decimal  values,  which  are  mostly  simple  integers,  along  with adjustments for scale and factor.

## 3. Problem definition

Allowing  the  exchange  of  lightweight  messages  among  medical  wearables, gateways and cloud infrastructure is an important requirement of IoT solutions when processing  big  data.  One  of  the  main  problems  is  that  the  verbosity  of  messages impacts the data exchange performance and cloud infrastructure costs. For example, the costs of the Microsoft Azure cloud gateway (IoT Hub) varies according to the message payload  size 8 .  A  common  approach  in  IoT  to  tackle  this  problem  is  to  aggregate measurement data at the gateway level according to a certain frequency, transmitting time series from the local gateway to the cloud from time to time [19]. The drawback of  this  approach  is  that  when  aggregating  a  series  of  measurements  of  one  element, metadata about each specific measurement is lost, affecting the ontological expressiveness of the messages.

UFO ECG represents series of measurements with the Sample sequence element, equivalent  to  FHIR  element Sampled  Data .  According  to  UFO  ECG, Observation series represents the complex event composed by (a part-of relationship) Observations that are evenly spaced in time, which are carried out in a Recording session . A Sample sequence is  a  collective,  i.e.,  an  ultimate  sortal,  which  has  parts  that  play  the  same functional  role  in  the  whole,  represented  as  an  ordered  sequence  of  data  units  that results  from  an Observation  series .  OpenEHR  emphasizes  this  requirement  of  time series  representation  and  includes  the  concept  of  'a  history  of  events,  i.e.,  as  a  time series, allowing all software to access data in a uniform way'. The root object ( History class) provides a list of events as attribute.

6 www.hl7.org/fhir/observation.html

7 www.hl7.org/fhir/observation-example-sample-data.json.html

8 docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/iot-hub/iot-hub-devguide-messages-construct

SAREF  does  not  define  a  term  for  the  time  series concept,  only  allowing  the representation of each granular measurement of a time series through the Measurement element. Although this approach improves the expressiveness of the data representation, thus the ontology quality, it produces an overhead to the message size when serialized. Therefore, a verbose message is generated when instantiating ECG data with SAREF, compared to the very same data represented with FHIR, UFO ECG or OpenEHR. For example,  our  experiments  on  ECG  data  serialization,  when  comparing  a  JSON-LD message that instantiates SAREF individual Measurements against the similar message in FHIR RDF, but with SampledData element, we found out that the SAREF message size is fifty times bigger (more verbose) than the FHIR message. This was calculated based on our performance evaluation [20], where an ECG device configured for 256Hz frequency provide data to a semantic gateway, which accumulates data each 5 seconds before  sending  the  message  to  the  cloud,  thus  1280  (5  x  256)  measurements  per message.  While  the  equivalent  SAREF  message  size  has  around  5Mb,  the  FHIR message size has around 100Kb. The discrepancy between SAREF and FHIR messages is non-linear, i.e., the difference of message size grows exponentially according to the number of measurements.

While  in  FHIR  (or  UFO  ECG  or  OpenEHR)  a  measurement  is  only  a  number added  to  the data element  (property  of SampledData )  representing  data  of  the  time series,  in  SAREF  a Measurement is  a  data  structure  that  implements  a  number  of properties  (e.g. isMeasuredIn and relatesToProperty ).  Similarly  to  SAREF,  W3C SSN/SOSA  does  this  through the Observation class, alleviating this issue by introducing  the hasSimpleResult property,  which  enables  the  direct  link  to  a  number (literal), but still requires the representation of other properties (e.g. observedProperty ). Therefore, due to this verbosity issue, we conclude that default SAREF is not suitable for exchanging IoT-based ECG time series data.

Table 1. Comparison of semantic models for IoT-based ECG monitoring systems

| Characteristic         | UFO ECG   | FHIR RDF   | SAREF   | SSN/SOSA   |
|------------------------|-----------|------------|---------|------------|
| Quality                | +         | -          | +       | +          |
| Message size (payload) | +         | +          | -       | -          |
| IoT-oriented           | -         | +-         | +       | +          |
| Standardized           | -         | HL7        | ETSI    | W3C        |

We  studied  alternatives, identifying their benefits  and  drawbacks.  Table  1 compares the semantic models 9  considered in this study. The quality of the semantic models is the first characteristic we compared, following the best practices of ontology engineering described in [21], more specifically the best practices #8 and #12, which regard common ontology pitfalls and ontology reuse, respectively. While UFO ECG, SAREF  and  SSN/SOSA  are  built  upon  common  conceptualization  mechanisms, merging different concepts in the same class/property and reusing existing ontologies, FHIR RDF presents poor quality because it is a (semi) automatic serialization of FHIR lexicon  standard.  Thus,  FHIR  RDF  is  a  straightforward  serialization  of  the  FHIR standard data model, which causes an overload of object properties, e.g., it has more than ten properties that represent the 'description' concept, and lacks reuse of common terms,  e.g.,  instead  of  having  more  than  ten  'description'  terms,  it  could  reuse dc:description .

9  We avoid the term 'ontology' because we understand that an ontology describes the common sense knowledge domain rather than a simple RDF serialization.

The  message  size  (payload)  indicates  whether  the  semantic  model  allows  the representation  of  time  series,  as  in  UFO  ECG  and  FHIR  RDF.  We  also  evaluated whether the semantic model is appropriate to the IoT context, i.e., whether it provides grammatical constructs for the main concepts of the IoT domain, e.g., sensor, actuator, protocol,  observation,  unit  of  measurement  and  measurement  properties.  Specific characteristics  of  the  ECG  domain  were  considered  in  this  analysis,  such  as  the mereology of an ECG device, the elements participating in an ECG recording session, the  ECG  leads  responsible  for  measuring  frequency-based  sample  sequences  (time series). Since our goal is the development of an EWS for the detection of risks of truck accidents, we also considered how to represent and retrieve multiple sensors data, such as acceleration data to calculate tri-axial function (impact) and ECG data to calculate ECG  waveform  features.  SSN/SOSA  and  SAREF  are  the  most  appropriate  IoT reference  ontologies,  as  mentioned  earlier,  while  some  FHIR  RDF  resources  can  be used  to  represent  some  of  the  IoT  constructs.  Finally,  we  evaluated  whether  the semantic  model  is  standardized  by  a  standardization  body,  such  as  HL7,  ETSI  and W3C for FHIR, SAREF and SSN/SOSA (respectively).

In  our  comparison  study,  we  concluded  that  a  standardized  IoT  ontology  that provides adequate balance of quality and payload representing time series for ECG data is  actually  lacking.  Therefore,  the problem addressed in this paper is how to achieve these  four  characteristics  in  a  single  ontology,  which  led  us  to  the  development  of SAREF4health as a SAREF extension.

Table 2. Competency questions to be responded by SAREF4health

| ID   | Textual description                                                                                                                                                        |
|------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| CQ01 | What is an ECG device and how it is composed (mereology)?                                                                                                                  |
| CQ02 | What are the elements participating in an ECG recording session?                                                                                                           |
| CQ03 | What is an ECG lead, what are the types of ECG leads, what type of property an ECG lead measures and what type of measurement an ECG lead can measure?                     |
| CQ04 | What is an ECG sample sequence?                                                                                                                                            |
| CQ05 | What is a time series of measurements?                                                                                                                                     |
| CQ06 | What is frequency (rate)measurement of an ECG sample sequence?                                                                                                             |
| CQ07 | How to represent tri-axial acceleration data from accelerometers of an ECG device?                                                                                         |
| CQ08 | How to integrate measurements from multiple sensors (e.g., ECG leads, accelerometer and battery monitor) of an ECG device for near real-time (frequency-based) monitoring? |

The main information requirements of this ontology regard the ECG and the IoT domains, described as competency questions (Table 2). While UFO ECG provides a high quality and deeper ontological analysis of the ECG domain, with rich descriptions following  foundational  categories,  SAREF  can  be  used  as  IoT  reference  model. Therefore, a set of competency questions was defined according to the main elements of  these  reference  ontologies.  The  scope  of  these  questions  was  narrowed  with  the information requirements of the use case validation of an EWS to detect truck accidents mentioned in Section 2.2.

## 4. SAREF4health

## 4.1. Methodology

We  have  been  working  on  the  'SEmantic  Model-driven  development  for  IoT Interoperability of emergenCy serviceS' (SEMIoTICS) framework [22], which is a set of technologies and guidelines for the development of semantic IoT EWSs. SAREF4health is part of the INTER-IoT-EWS solution, playing the role of semantic model for ECG data used in our IoT health platform [11]. Ontology-driven conceptual modelling is an important component adopted by the SEMIoTICS framework, used for the design of the EWS with support of an ontological language that provides structural and  temporal  predicates,  as  OntoUML  [23].  In  order  to  create  the  SAREF4health extension,  we  adopted  the  cyclical  semantic  enhancement  process  of  UFO  research, increasing the quality of the core ontology through model assessment based on formal lightweight verification and validation activities [24]. The UFO ECG ontology played the role of a unified well-founded EHR reference model representing the ECG domain. A side effect of this approach is that UFO ECG provides links to HL7 aECG, which FHIR is based upon, thus, enabling straightforward alignments to FHIR RDF.

The  SAREF4health  design  was  leveraged  by  the  same  interactive  and  iterative approach  experienced  in  the  other  standardized  extensions  of  SAREF,  which  was created in a transparent manner to allow stakeholders to provide input and follow the evolution of the work. The first step comprised the requirement collection to guide the implementation  and  validation  of  the  ontology.  Numerous  information  sources  were analysed,  as  specifications,  datasets,  standards,  APIs  and  data  formats,  as  well  as domain expert opinions and existing initiatives in the healthcare domain. The second step  comprised  the  use  case  collection,  specified  in  natural  language.  The  third  step comprised the purpose and scope definition of the ontology for the specific use cases regarding the monitoring of the cardiac behaviour of drivers in a way that abnormal situations,  e.g.,  arrhythmia  (bradycardia  and  tachycardia),  could  be  detected  by  the emergency system, reflected in the competency questions.

## 4.2. Representing ECG time series

The main definitions used to support the SAREF4health elements are described in Table  3.  Although  UFO  ECG  and  FHIR  standard  were  carefully  designed  with  the support of healthcare experts, we decided to review the terminology used by them. For example, why UFO ECG uses the term Sample Sequence while  FHIR  uses Sampled Data to describe the very same concept? Either way, the terms reflect the Time Series collective concept, i.e., a sequence of data units in successive equally spaced points in time: each sampled data unit plays the same role in the series (whole).

In  SAREF4health,  we  termed  the  element Time  Series  Measurements since  it refers to a time series of a sequence of measurements made by a device and it is a term often used in the measurement science (metrology) 10 .  We avoided prefixing this term with ECG because it can be applied to other types of measurements. An ECG Sample Sequence is  a Time Series Measurements that  is  measured  in Electric Potential units (an array) and relates to the Heart Electrical Activity property. A Sample (UFO ECG) can be interpreted as a Measurement (SAREF), so we classify Measurement as a kind.

10 https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/measurement-science/

A crucial design decision was to classify Time Series Measurements as Measurement in  SAREF,  for  two  reasons:  (i)  this  representation  adheres  to  the definition of Measurement , i.e., measured value ( Electric Potential units) of a property ( Heart Electrical Activity ); (ii) we reused the same structure of SAREF regarding class axioms of object properties, e.g., hasTimestamp , isMeasuredIn and relatesToProperty . The main implications of this choice are twofold: (1) ontologically this specialization is incorrect, since a collective cannot specialize a kind; (2) the hasValue property limits the  value  domain  of  a Measurement to  exactly  one  float  number.  The hasValues property was added to overcome this issue, in which a Time Series Measurements can instantiate this property multiple times as an array of float numbers. In the conceptual model, instead of adding this specialization, the relation makesMeasurement between an ECG Lead and an ECG Sample Sequence makes this design decision explicit.

Table 3. Definitions related to time series in UFO ECG and standards

| Term                                                | Source(s)       | Textual definition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Sample sequence                                     | UFO ECG         | Collective: 'ordered sequence of samples resulting from an Observation series ' (ecgOnto:095).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Observation series                                  | UFO ECG         | Complex event: 'Series of observations evenly spaced in time carried out in an ECG Recording session' (ecgOnto:093).                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Sampled data Observation.component.valueSampledData | HL7 FHIR        | 'Data that comes from a series of measurements taken by a device, which may have upper and lower limits'.                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Time Series Observation                             | O&M (ISO 19156) | 'observation whose result is a time-series'.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Series                                              | HL7 aECG        | 'Contains one or more sequence sets sharing a common frame of reference'.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Series General Series Module                        | DICOM           | A property of General ECG that 'specifies the attributes that identify and describe general information about the Series within a Study '. A Series is as a sequence of data sharing a common frame of reference.                                                                                                               |
| History                                             | OpenEHR         | 'Root object of a linear history, i.e. time series structure. For a periodic series of events, period will be set, and the time of each Event in the History must correspond'                                                                                                                                                   |
| Event                                               | OpenEHR         | 'Defines the abstract notion of a single event in a series. This class is generic, allowing types to be generated which are locked to particular spatial types'                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Recording device                                    | UFO ECG         | Kind: 'Device used to acquire (to record) an ECG from a given Patient by means of electrodes. Also called electrocardiograph' (ecgOnto:087).                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Recording device as recorder                        | UFO ECG         | Role: 'Recording device as it plays the role of an ECG recorder' (ecgOnto:088).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Recording session                                   | UFO ECG         | Complex event: 'Medical service in which the Patient is subject of ECG recording by some Recording device . The Recording session (event) can be said to temporally coincide, albeit in a different level of abstraction, with the Observation series (event). In other words, these two events have the same time boundaries'. |
| Lead                                                | UFO ECG         | Kind: 'Viewpoint of the heart activity that emerges from an Observation series of the p.d. between two electrode placements on specific regions of the surface of the patient's body' (ecgOnto:096)                                                                                                                             |
| Lead                                                | HL7 aECG        | 'A vector along which the heart's electrical activity is recorded as a waveform'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Patient                                             | UFO ECG         | Role: 'Person as he/she plays the role of being subject of care, i.e., scheduled to receive, receiving, or having received a healthcare service (based on ISO/TC 18308:2003)'                                                                                                                                                   |

Finally,  following  the  same  approach  of  UFO  ECG  with Sample Rate data  type and FHIR with period data property of SampledData , a class axiom was added in Time Series Measurements to relate it to a frequency (rate). For the definition of frequency, we reused SAREF4envi, importing the object property has Frequency Measurement .

An ECG device is usually referred as an ECG unit that plays the role of a recorder in the complex event (action) of ECG Recording Session .  In SAREF, we can classify this complex  action as a Task that an  ECG  device accomplishes . Therefore, accomplishes plays the role of the inverse of the hasParticipant relationship (same as isAccomplishedBy ).  The hasParticipant relationship between ECG Recording Session and Person Under ECG Monitoring is implemented with dc:author (Dublin Core).

In UFO, the event stereotype provides the relations start and end to limit the event temporal boundaries, as used in UFO ECG. SAREF provides the hasTime property, a 'relationship  to  associate  time  information  to  an  entity',  thus,  we  specialized  this relation as hasStart and hasEnd ,  adding them as class axioms of Task .  In UFO ECG, the  other  participant  in  this  event  is  a Patient ,  but  in  SAREF4health  we  adopted  a different ontological commitment. We argue that someone does not need to be a patient (person under medical treatment) to participate in an ECG recording session. Thus, we introduced the Person Under ECG Monitoring element, i.e., a role of a Living Person , which is a phase exploited several times  in  the  UFO research  [25].  This  ontological commitment  is  motivated  by  the  EWS  use  case,  since  a  driver  is  not  necessarily  a patient. In SAREF4health, a Living Person is a Person , which is an element imported from DUL and is aligned to schema.org. We only consider ECG specific to humans.

Figure 1. SAREF4health main elements (green) with instantiated examples (blue).

[FIGURE]

Usually, the frequency of an ECG device can be set through an API. This reflects the  frequency  of  each ECG Sample Sequence measured  during  a Recording Session . Therefore,  we  added  a  class  axiom  to  the ECG device element,  the has  Frequency Measurement property with range of only Frequency Measurements (from SAREF4envi). Although it seems redundant, this approach is required to differentiate the current frequency of a device from a frequency used in prior sample sequences. For example, the device Shimmer3 ECG can be set for sampling frequency (rate) of 512Hz, which is recommended for clinical grade ECG, i.e., 512 data samples per second or an interval  of  0.002  second  between  two  consecutive  data  samples,  from  0.05Hz  to 8000Hz range. After collecting some sample sequences and before sending the message to the gateway, the frequency is set to 256Hz and new sample sequences are collected. With our approach the message describes the current frequency of the device (256Hz) and the frequencies used in each collected sample sequence (512Hz and 256Hz).

An ECG Device registers the Heart Electrical Activity with support of electrodes attached to different places of the body (assuming that the heart is beating inside the body of a living person). Two electrodes enable the measuring of an ECG lead , which is  an  electrical vector characterized by the depolarization of the heart resulted by the electrical  signal  between  the  atria  and  the  ventricles.  Manufacturers  commonly characterize  an ECG device by  the  number  of ECG leads it  has.  An  ECG  device  is composed by extremity electrodes, which must be attached close to the left arm (LA), right arm (RA), left leg (LL) and the right leg (RL); and chest (precordial) electrodes, which can vary from one unit to six units (V1-6). As a convention, lead I measures the electrical activity from RA to LA, lead II measures of the electrical activity from RA to LL, lead III measures the electrical activity from LA to LL. The rule lead I + lead III = lead II enables to derive a lead based on the other two. Leads I, II, III are known as Bipolar Limb . Unipolar leads measure the electrical activity from the Wilson's central terminal (negative pole) to each of the chest electrodes (positive poles). For example, the Shimmer3 ECG is a four-lead ECG device wired with four extremity electrodes and one chest electrode, enabling the measurement of three bipolar and one unipolar leads.

For  the  sake  of  simplicity  and  to  avoid  verbosity  and  follow  the  industry terminology,  we  decided  to  represent  an ECG  device according  to  its ECG  leads , classifying an ECG lead as a Sensor , since a sensor 'detects and responds to events or changes  in  the  physical  environment'  (SAREF).  A  lead  can  be  either  bipolar  or unipolar, and an ECG device consists of , at least, one Bipolar Limb and one Unipolar lead.  An ECG lead measures  the Heart  Electrical  Activity property  and makes measurements of ECG Sample Sequence . Figure 1 represents these main elements in an OntoUML model.

## 4.3. Validation and discussion

The first part of the SAREF4health validation was performed by implementing the ontology  as  RDF,  which  was  supported  by  the  Menthor  [24]  and  Protegé  tools. Instances  of  SAREF4health  were  created  (as  examples),  and  basic  SPARQL  queries were executed to answer each competency question. As illustrated in some SAREF4health instances in Figure 1, the examples are based on the Shimmer3 ECG device, the device API (TinyOS), the mobile app (Android), which plays the role of field gateway, and an IoT platform context broker, playing the role of cloud gateway. Table  4  summarizes  the  results.  Because  of  space  limitation,  we  removed  textual properties (e.g., labels and comments) from the results. The SPARQL queries used are based on the following template:

SELECT * WHERE {  {?s1 ?p1 [Name of the term]} UNION {[Name of the term] ?p2 ?o2} . }

All  competency  questions  could  be  answered,  assessing  the  completeness  of SAREF4health and, therefore, its semantic validity. Our ontological commitments were based on the definitions listed in Table 3 and were assessed by analysing the SPARQL results.  For  example, time  series element  (CQ05)  is  equivalent  to sample  sequence (UFO ECG) and Sampled Data (FHIR). The SPARQL result shows that the structure allows  the  representation  of  an  ordered  frequency-based  sequence  of  float  data.  The semantic  validity  provided  a  basic  quality  level  for  SAREF4health,  which  was leveraged  by  the  application  of  our  methodology  based  on  the  best  practices  for ontology engineering. We argue that SAREF4health has a high quality because of the ontological foundations and other practical matters, such as making SAREF4health as dereferenceable as possible and checking and reusing popular and common ontologies. A  limitation  of  SAREF4health  is  that  it  (still)  lacks  a  concept  to  represent  the physician(s)  administering  an  ECG  recording  session,  which  is  common  in  other standards (e.g., DICOM). To overcome this issue we suggest to add a class axiom to ECG Recording Session with the dc:creator , similarly to the approach with dc:author .

Table 4. Responding the competency questions with SPARQL queries

| ID   | Results                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| CQ01 | > rdfs:subClassOf saref:consistsOf min 1 ECGLeadUnipolar > rdfs:subClassOf saref:consistsOf min 1 ECGLeadBipolarLimb > rdfs:subClassOf saref:accomplishes only ECGRecordingSession > rdfs:subClassOf saref4envi:hasFrequencyMeasurement only saref4envi:FrequencyMeasurement > rdfs:subClassOf saref:Device < sarefInst:Shimmer3ECG_unit_T9JRN42 rdf:type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | An ECG device is a device composed by at least one unipolar and one bipolar limb leads. It accomplishes the task of ECG recording session and has a specific frequency measurement.                                                                                                                                                                          |
| CQ02 | > rdfs:subClassOf dc:author only LivingPerson > rdfs:subClassOf saref:Task < ECGDevice saref:accomplishes only ECGRecordingSession < sarefInst:RecordingECGSession_01 rdf:type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | An ECG recording session is a task in which a living person participates and is accomplished by an ECG device.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| CQ03 | > rdfs:subClassOf saref:measuresProperty only HeartElectricalActivity > rdfs:subClassOf saref:makesMeasurement only ECGSampleSequence > rdfs:subClassOf saref:Sensor < ECGLeadBipolarLimb rdfs:subClassOf < ECGLeadUnipolar rdfs:subClassOf                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | An ECG lead is a sensor that can be either bipolar limb or unipolar, which is able to measure a heart electrical activity, making measurements of the type ECG sample sequence.                                                                                                                                                                              |
| CQ04 | > rdfs:subClassOf saref:relatesToProperty only HeartElectricalActivity > rdfs:subClassOf saref:isMeasuredIn only ElectricPotential > rdfs:subClassOf TimeSeriesMeasurements < ECGLead saref:makesMeasurement only ECGSampleSequence < sarefInst:ECGMeasurementsSeries_Example001 rdf:type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | An ECG sample sequence is a measurement time series that relates to the property of heart electrical activity, measures in an electric potential unit. ECG sample sequences are measured by ECG leads.                                                                                                                                                       |
| CQ05 | > rdfs:subClassOf saref4envi:hasFrequencyMeasurement only saref4envi:FrequencyMeasurement > rdfs:subClassOf hasValues only xsd:float > rdfs:subClassOf saref:Measurement < ECGSampleSequence rdfs:subClassOf                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | A measurement time series is a measurement that has a frequency and a set of float values. Currently, the only type of time series measurements available is the ECG sample sequence.                                                                                                                                                                        |
| CQ06 | > saref4envi:FrequencyMeasurement > rdfs:subClassOf saref:Measurement > rdfs:subClassOf saref:isMeasuredIn exactly 1 saref4envi:FrequencyUnit > rdfs:subClassOf saref:relatesToProperty value saref4envi:Frequency                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | The frequency measurement type imported from SAREF4envi is a measurement which is measured in a frequency unit and relates to the frequency property.                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| CQ07 | > sarefInst:Shimmer3ECG_unit_T9JRN42 rdf:type :ECGDevice ; saref:consistsOf sarefInst:AcceleroemeterX_ECGDevice ; saref:consistsOf sarefInst:AcceleroemeterY_ECGDevice ; saref:consistsOf sarefInst:AcceleroemeterZ_ECGDevice ; > sarefInst:AcceleroemeterX_ECGDevice rdf:type saref:Sensor ; saref:makesMeasurement sarefInst:Measurement_AccelerationX_001 ; saref:measuresProperty dim:Acceleration ; > sarefInst:Measurement_AccelerationX_001 rdf:type saref:Measurement ; saref:hasTimestamp "2018-04-22T22:15:30"^^xsd:dateTime ;                                                                                                                                                                                             | Tri-axial acceleration data are represented according to each accelerometer sensor (X,Y,Z) of the ECG device. Each accelerometer sensor measures the property acceleration and makes acceleration measurements. An acceleration measurement is measured in metre per second squared, has a value and a timestamp.                                            |
| CQ08 | > sarefInst:Shimmer3ECG_unit_T9JRN42 rdf:type :ECGDevice ; saref4envi:hasFrequencyMeasurement sarefInst:FrequencyOf256Hertz ; saref:accomplishes sarefInst:RecordingECGSession_01 ; saref:consistsOf sarefInst:AcceleroemeterX_ECGDevice ; saref:consistsOf sarefInst:AcceleroemeterY_ECGDevice ; saref:consistsOf sarefInst:AcceleroemeterZ_ECGDevice ; saref:consistsOf sarefInst:ECGLead_III_code131389 ; saref:consistsOf sarefInst:ECGLead_II_code131330 ; saref:consistsOf sarefInst:ECGLead_I_code131329 ; saref:consistsOf sarefInst:ECGLead_Vx_RL_code131389 ; saref:consistsOf sarefInst:Shimmer3BatteryLevelSensor_T9JRN42 ; saref:hasManufacturer "Shimmer" ; saref:hasTypicalConsumption sarefInst:Shimmer3ECGBattery ; | The ECG device mereology is responsible for representing the device sensors through the consists of property. This structure allows (near) real-time monitoring by accumulating the measurements (made by the sensors). This includes the time series measurements (e.g. made by ECG leads) and isolated measurements (e.g. acceleration and battery level). |

The  second  phase  of  the  validation  focused  on  providing  evidence  about  the semantic interoperability improvement of an ontology-driven health IoT platform using SAREF4health  in  a  common  IoT  scenario:  connecting  the  device  (Shimmer3  ECG unit) to a field gateway (Android smartphone) to a cloud gateway (MS Azure IoT Hub). A  prototype  was  developed  to  improve  the  manufacturer's  Android  app  (Shimmer Xamarin Capture) by translating the data received from the ECG  device to SAREF4health and enabling different  rates of  data  exchange  between  device-mobile and mobile-cloud, which is a common network bandwidth optimization requirement. This scenario also allowed us to exploit the SAREF4health approach for measurement time series.  Therefore,  the Android app plays the role of a semantic gateway, which serializes  the  SAREF4health  messages  with  JSON-LD.  Code  Snippet  1  shows  the method responsible for generating the ECG device messages in JSON-LD according to SAREF4health that are published in the cloud gateway.

The  prototype  is  under  functional  tests  of  pre-defined  accident  simulations  with truck drivers transiting in a port area, and the first results show that SAREF4health is an  adequate  data  representation  considering  performance  issues  of  IoT  solutions.  In particular,  the  message  size  (payload)  was  measured  and  indicates  similar  size  to equivalent  FHIR  messages  when  representing  time  series.  Therefore,  SAREF4health can  be  classified  as  the  most  appropriate  ontology  for  IoT-based  ECG  monitoring systems, according to the characteristics listed in Table 1.

Code snippet 1. Ontology-driven health IoT platform implementing data exchange of an ECG device

Currently,  SAREF4health  is  not  standardized  yet,  some  activities  of  the  ETSI procedure (described in Section 2.1) need to be addressed. At first, a specialists' task force needs to be created to enable interactive validation with domain experts and other stakeholders, creating new validation scenarios for ECG monitoring. Furthermore, the scope of the current version of SAREF4health may need to be extended to include new healthcare  use  cases  besides  ECG  monitoring,  which  will  require  a  new  ontology engineering cycle. A plan for SAREF4health maintenance is under construction.

Besides the SAREF4health ontology, an important contribution of this paper is the methodology  dealing  with  both  conceptual  modelling  and  implementation  concerns, where  design  decisions  must  be  clearly  exposed  to  understand  the  discrepancies between the  conceptual  model  and  the  final  ontology.  We  argue  that  SAREF4health has higher ontological expressiveness because of its completeness for the ECG domain, since 'the notion of completeness at the level of individual specifications is related to the  notion  of  ontological  expressiveness'  [25].  Moreover,  we  believe  that  construct redundancy  [26]  was  eliminated  from  SAREF4health  regarding  the  elements  about Observation from UFO ECG. Although these terms are ontologically correct, in UFO ECG they bring additional complexity, represented implicitly in SAREF through the make  measurement property  and  the Measurement class.  While  in  SAREF  a  device makes a measurement, which has a timestamp, a value and is measured in a specific unit;  in  UFO  ECG  a  device  carries  an  observation,  which  has  a  timestamp  and  this observation produces a sample, which has a value and is measured in a specific unit.

Finally, as a side effect of this work, clear mappings between UFO ECG to FHIR were identified,  as  (UFO) Observation series to  (FHIR) Observation ,  (UFO) Sample sequence to (FHIR) Sampled Data ,  (UFO) Sample sequence &gt; sample-sequence-of is the inverse of (FHIR) Observation &gt; valueSampledData . Other mappings can be easily extracted  from  the  results  of  our  ontological  analysis  described  in  Section  4.2.  The SAREF4health ontology (TTL) and the prototype are available for download 11 .

## 5. Conclusion

Although ETSI SAREF  and  W3C  SSN/SOSA  are  standardized  IoT reference ontologies, they only provide a verbose way to describe time series data in common healthcare scenarios, as for ECG monitoring. In this paper, we describe an extension of SAREF that addresses this problem, combining ontology-driven conceptual modelling, standardization initiatives and RDF implementation of stream data. SAREF4health is able to represent real-time ECG time series of sensor measurements that are exchanged between the field (mobile device) and the cloud (context broker) gateways.

Our validation showed that a trade-off between ontology quality and lightweight data  serialization  was  a  crucial  aspect  on  the  design  of  the  SAREF4health  ontology. The use of an ECG reference ontology grounded in UFO theory played a major role to improve  the  ontology  quality,  resulting  on  the  improvement  of  the  semantics  of  the RDF implementation. Furthermore, the reuse of standardized ontologies showed to be essential  to  understand  both  IoT  and  healthcare  domains,  as  well  as  implementation constraints.  SAREF4health  addressed  the  performance  requirement  regarding  the impact of time series measurements in the message size (payload), i.e., the verbosity problem,  validated  through  a  prototype  of  an  ontology-driven  health  IoT  platform, which transmits data from the device to a mobile to the cloud in different frequencies.

Future  work  includes  a  formal  empirical  validation  to  compare  SAREF4health with other ontologies studied here, especially HL7 FHIR RDF. Semantic translations between  SAREF4health  and  FHIR  RDF  are  under  development  to  address  the requirements of integrating different IoT platforms that support data acquisition for an emergency system. Semantic loss and processing impact of these translations will be measured.  The  emergency  system  will  be  tested  through  real  scenarios  of  accident prevention and response in the port of Valencia.

Finally,  after  this  full  validation,  SAREF4health  will  be  submitted  to  the  ETSI standardization  process.  Independent  of  whether  SAREF4health  will  ever  become  a standard,  we  believe  that  this  work  provides  an  important  contribution  towards  a higher-quality  FHIR  ontology,  rather  than  a  simple  RDF  representation  of  the  FHIR lexicon data model. Although HL7 FHIR lexicon standard is widely adopted and used in industry (e.g., by Google and Apple), its semantic model is still in early stages.

11  https://github.com/jonimoreira/INTER-IoT-EWS

## Acknowledgments Work carried out under the CAPES funding BEX 1046/14-4.

## References

1. Xia, H., I. Asif, and X. Zhao, Cloud-ECG for real time ECG monitoring and analysis. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 2013. 110 (3): p. 253-259.
2. Rahmani, A.M., et al., Exploiting smart e-Health gateways at the edge of healthcare Internet-ofThings: A fog computing approach. Future Generation Computer Systems, 2018. 78 : p. 641-658.
3. Hossain, M.S. and G. Muhammad, Cloud-assisted Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) - Enabled framework for health monitoring. Computer Networks, 2016. 101 : p. 192-202.
4. Palavalli, A., D. Karri, and  S. Pasupuleti. Semantic  Internet of  Things . in IEEE  Tenth International Conference on Semantic Computing (ICSC) . 2016.
5. Li, H., et al., Enabling Semantics in an M2M/IoT Service Delivery Platform. Proceedings - 2016 IEEE 10th International Conference on Semantic Computing (ICSC), 2016: p. 206-213.
6. Daniele, L., F. den Hartog, and J. Roes. Created in Close Interaction with the Industry: The Smart Appliances REFerence (SAREF) Ontology . in Formal Ontologies Meet Industry: 7th International Workshop (FOMI) . 2015.
7. EC, Rolling plan for ICT standardisation 2017 . 2017.
8. Moreira, J.L.R., et al. Towards IoT platforms' integration: Semantic Translations between W3C SSN and ETSI SAREF . in Semantics. Workshop SIS-IoT . 2017.
9. Steinberg,  J.S.,  et  al., 2017  ISHNE-HRS  expert  consensus  statement  on  ambulatory  ECG  and external cardiac monitoring/telemetry. Heart Rhythm, 2017. 14 (7): p. e55-e96.
10. Fang, Y., C. Li, and L. Sun, Design of an Early Warning System for Patients with Cardiovascular Diseases Under Mobile Environment. Procedia Computer Science, 2016. 96 : p. 819-825.
11. Moreira, J., et al. Improving the semantic interoperability of IoT Early Warning Systems: the Port of Valencia use case . in Enterprise Interoperability IX: I-ESA proceedings . 2018.
12. Fortino,  G.  and  R.  Gravina, Fall-MobileGuard:  a  smart  real-time  fall  detection  system ,  in Proceedings  of  the  10th  EAI  International  Conference  on  Body  Area  Networks .  2015,  ICST (Institute  for  Computer  Sciences,  Social-Informatics  and  Telecommunications  Engineering): Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. p. 44-50.
13. Gonçalves, B., V. Zamborlini, and G. Guizzardi, An Ontological Analysis of the Electrocardiogram. Journal of Communication, Information and Innovation in Health, 2009.
14. Gonçalves,  B.,  G.  Guizzardi,  and  J.G.  Pereira  Filho, Using  an  ECG  reference  ontology  for semantic interoperability of ECG data. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 2011. p. 126-136.
15. Cosío-León,  M.A.,  et  al., The  use  of  standards  in  embedded  devices  to  achieve  end  to  end semantic interoperability on health systems. Computer Standards &amp; Interfaces, 2018. 57 : p. 68-73.
16. HL7, HL7 Version 3 Implementation Guide: Annotated ECG (aECG) R1, Release 2 . 2005.
17. Bond, R.R., et al., A review of ECG storage formats. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 2011. 80 (10): p. 681-697.
18. Solbrig,  H.R.,  et  al., Modeling  and  validating  HL7  FHIR  profiles  using  semantic  web  Shape Expressions ( ShEx ). Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 2017. 67 : p. 90-100.
19. Fortino, G., et al., BodyCloud: A SaaS approach for community Body Sensor Networks. Future Generation Computer Systems, 2014. 35 : p. 62-79.
20. Moreira,  J.,  L.F.  Pires,  and  M.V.  Sinderen. Semantic  interoperability  for  the  IoT:  Analysis  of JSON for Linked Data . in Enterprise Interoperability IX: I-ESA proceedings. BD4EI. 2018.
21. Gyrard, A., M. Serrano, and G.A. Atemezing. Semantic web methodologies, best practices and ontology engineering applied to Internet of Things . in 2015 IEEE 2nd World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT) . 2015.
22. Moreira, J.L.R., et al., Towards ontology-driven situation-aware disaster management. Journal of applied ontology, 2015. 10 (3-4): p. 339-353.
23. Moreira,  J.L.R.,  et  al. Ontology-driven  Conceptual  Modeling  for  Early  Warning  Systems: Redesigning the Situation Modeling Language . in MODELSWARD . 2017.
24. Moreira,  J.,  et  al. Menthor editor: An ontology-driven conceptual modeling platform .  in FOIS . 2016. CEUR Workshop Proceedings.
25. Guizzardi, G., Ontological foundations for structural conceptual models . 2005: Enschede. p. 416.
26. Bera, P.a.P., Geert, The effects of construct redundancy on readers' understanding of conceptual models. JOURNAL OF DATABASE MANAGEMENT, 2017.
