## Semantic Documentation in Project Management

## Erick Casagrande Bastos, Monalessa Perini Barcellos, Ricardo de Almeida Falbo

Ontology and Conceptual Modeling Research Group (NEMO), Department of Computer Science, Federal University of Espírito Santo -Vitória -ES -Brazil

{erickcasagrande, monalessa, falbo}@inf.ufes.br

Abstract. The  existence  of  project  management  supporting  tools  did  not eliminate  the  need  of  using  desktop  documents  in  this  domain.  However, retrieving  information  from  documents  is  usually  not  trivial  and  depends  on human effort. In this work we propose the use of semantic documentation in the project management domain as a way of getting useful information from data  recorded  in  documents  and  spreadsheets.  For  this,  we  developed  the Software Project Management Ontology and explored it to create features to support  activities  related  to  scope,  time  and  cost  management.  The  features were  implemented  in  a  specialization  of  the  Infrastructure  for  Managing Semantic Documents, which was evaluated through an experimental study.

## 1. Introduction

There  are  several  tools  to  support  project  management,  but  they  are  not  used  by  all organizations and often do not eliminate the need of using desktop documents [Villalobos et  al. 2011].  Text  documents  and  spreadsheets  are  frequently  used  in  the context of projects, since they are instruments to record useful information to support communication among stakeholders and understanding about the project [Bruggemann et  al. 2000].  However,  one  disadvantage  of  using  documents  is  the  difficulty  of obtaining consolidated information from them, especially when information is spread in several  documents.  The  access  to  document  content  typically  depends  on  human intervention, since documents were originally created to be understood by humans and not by computers. Thus, retrieving and analyzing document content can be unproductive and  sometimes  inefficient.  Besides,  gathering  relevant  information  from  different documents can be so wearing that people may tend not to do [Arantes and Falbo 2010].

Semantic  Documentation  can  be  used  to  cope  with  this  problem.  Semantic Documentation  consists  in  adding  metadata  into  desktop  document  content  so  that  it becomes  available  for  computers  interpretation.  It  allows  relating  annotated  contents and use the relations to extract information from several documents, providing a general view  that  probably  could  not  be  gotten  without  the  annotations  [Arantes  and  Falbo 2010]. Ideally, metadata should be based on ontologies. Ontologies are ideal vehicles to describe  metadata,  since  they  represent  a  conceptualization  and  establish  a  common vocabulary to be shared [Sicilia 2006].

During a project, information regarding planning, execution, progress, monitoring  and  control  is  recorded  in  documents  and  spreadsheets  (e.g.,  project  plan and project monitoring and status reports). Talas et al . (2011) point out that, due to the importance  of  documents  in  a  project,  project  members  should  share  a  common environment and be able to access the documents content in an easy and efficient way. Thus,  if  information  is  structured  and  annotated,  computers  can  help  deal  with  it.

Besides,  annotating  project  documents  helps  store  and  retrieve  knowledge  acquired during a project and reuse it during other projects. Once documents are annotated, it is possible  to  build  semantic  repositories  containing  project  documents  and  develop semantic documentation tools able to retrieve consolidated information from them.

Scope, time and cost are core areas in project management. The use of semantic documentation in this context can help extract and integrate data recorded in documents, providing an integrated view useful for project managers to make decisions.

The  Infrastructure  for  Managing  Semantic  Documents  (IMSD)  [Arantes  and Falbo  2010]  is  an  environment  able  to  manage  desktop  documents  and  store  their content  in  a  semantic  repository.  IMSD  provides  general  semantic  documentation features, such as document annotation and version control. Although these features are useful  for  managing  documents  produced  in  any  domain,  they  are  not  enough  to properly support project management activities.

Domain ontologies can be explored aiming at identification and implementation of features capable of supporting tasks in that domain [Falbo et al. 2014]. In this sense, explore concepts, relations and properties of a software project management ontology could provide a basis to semantic documentation features suitable for software project management.  Thus,  semantic  documentation  can  allow  retrieving  data  from  several documents and accessing consolidated information regarding projects, helping  project planning, execution, monitoring and control.

Considering that, the purpose of the work presented in this paper is to explore the  use  of  semantic  documentation  to  support  software  project  management  aspects, especially scope, time and costs management. We started by investigating the state-ofart through a systematic literature review that analyzed the use of semantic annotation in project management. After, aiming to establish the domain conceptualization to be used as  basis  to  semantic  annotations,  we  developed  the  Software  Project  Management Ontology  (SPMOnt),  which  addresses  scope,  time  and  costs  planning  and  execution. Following,  we  analyzed  IMSD  and  SPMOnt  to  identify  features  to  support  project management aspects. Then, we extended IMSD to make it able to annotate spreadsheets and created the Infrastructure for Managing Semantic Documents for Software Project Management (IMSD-SPM), an  IMSD specialization  with  specific  features  to  support project management aspects. Finally, we conducted an experimental study to evaluate our proposal.

This  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  Section  2  talks  briefly  about  semantic documentation  and  project  management;  Section  3  introduces  the  Software  Project Management  Ontology;  Section  4  presents  our  proposal;  Section  5  addresses  the experimental  study  carried  out  to  evaluate  the  proposal;  Section  6  concerns  related works; and Section 7 presents our final considerations.

## 2. Semantic Documentation and Project Management

Semantic Annotation was created to deal with limitations of extracting information from web  pages  content.  It  consists  in  adding  metadata  to  the  pages  content  to  allow computers  to  retrieve  data  from  them.    This  gave  rise  to Web  Semantic ,  which  uses ontology-based  metadata  to  bring  structure  to  the  meaningful  content  of  web  pages, minimizing the lack of semantics and allowing both, humans and computers, interpret and retrieve data from web pages [Berners-Lee et al. 2001].

Problems  related  to  extract  information  from  text  content  also  occur  in  the context  of  desktop  documents,  such  as  text  documents  and  spreadsheets.  Thus,  Web Semantic principles can be applied to manage desktop documents content, given origin to Semantic  Documentation ,  whose  purpose  is  make  desktop  documents  content interpretable for computers [Arantes and Falbo 2010]. Semantic documents can provide services such as advanced search, reasoning using document metadata, and knowledge management services, like document repositories and document management.

In the literature there are some tools to support Semantic Documentation. In the context  of  this  work  the  Infrastructure  for  Managing  Semantic  Documents  (IMSD) [Arantes and Falbo 2010] is particularly important. It provides: (i) a way to semantically annotate  document  templates; (ii) a  mechanism  for  controlling  versions  of  semantic content extracted from semantic document versions (and, therefore, a way for tracking the evolution of the data embedded inside a semantic document); and (iii) data visibility to  end-users  allowing  for  searches  and  data  change  notification  subscription  to  aid developers to get up-to-date information about something they are interested in.

Problems related to access and manage document content clearly occur in the project management context, since text documents and spreadsheets are frequently used as  instruments  for  recording  and  sharing  information  among  project  members.  In  this sense, semantic documentation has potential use in this area.

Project  management  involves  the  application  of  knowledge,  skills,  tools  and techniques  to  project  activities  aiming  to  meet  project  requirements  [PMI  2013]. According  to  the  PMBOK  [PMI  2013],  there  are  ten  knowledge  areas  (KAs)  to  be managed in a project, namely: Integration, Scope, Stakeholder, Human Resource, Time, Cost, Risk, Quality, Communication, and Procurement.

Project  management  comprehends  three  main  interactive  phases  [Pressman 2011]: planning, execution, and monitoring and  control. During project  planning it  is established  a  plan  to  the  project,  including  the  project  scope,  team,  schedule,  and budget,  among  others.    Execution  consists  of  executing  the  project  following  the established plan. Monitoring and control aims to compare the plans with the execution, identify problems and present solutions. During this phase, performance indicators can help the project manager. Earned  Value  Analysis  [Fleming  and  Koppelman  1999]  and its indicators Schedule Progress Index (SPI) and Cost Progress Index (CPI) can be used to provide information about project progress and performance, as well as to calculate cost and time estimations for project conclusion.

Aiming at investigating the use of semantic annotation in the project management domain, we carried out a systematic literature review to analyze initiatives involving semantic annotation to support project management. Six digital libraries were searched,  namely:  Scopus,  Engineering  Village,  ACM,  IEEE  Xplore,  Springer,  and ScienceDirect. Five initiatives were found:  Inter-Organization Projects (CMIO) [Nakatsuka and Ishida 2006]; Collaboration in Public Policy Making, Implementation and  Evaluation  (CPPMIE)  [Loukis  2007];  Semantic  Annotation  based  on  Software Knowledge Sharing Space (SKSS) [Lu et al. 2008]; Semex [Talaš et al. 2011] and Use of  Semantic  Wiki  as  a  Capturing  Tool  for  Lessons  Learned  (SMW)  [Elkaffas  and Wagih 2013]. Detailed information about the systematic literature review and its results can be found in [Bastos et al. 2015]. Next a brief summary of the results is presented.

By analyzing the selected publications, we noticed that only two proposals were conceived aiming to support project management. Although the other proposals support aspects  related  to  project  management,  this  is  not  their  main  concern.  Four  proposals use  domain  ontologies  as  a  basis  for  annotating  documents  or  web  pages  and  all proposals adopt manual annotation. Spreadsheets are not annotated in any proposal. As for the project management aspects addressed, the proposals support some ones related to  Scope,  Integration,  Communication  and  Stakeholder  Management.  Although  six digital libraries have been searched, only five initiatives were identified and only two of them  are  truly  devoted  to  the  project  management  domain.  This  fact  shows  that  the research topic is recent and has not been much explored. Since documents are still an important instrument to record and share information regarding projects, we believe that the use of semantic annotation in project management is a relevant topic and there are opportunities of research in this area. Thus, we propose to use semantic documentation as a way to support scope, time and cost management aspects in software projects. Since metadata to annotate documents should be based on domain ontologies, we developed the Software Project Management Ontology, which is presented in the next section.

## 3. The Software Project Management Ontology (SPMOnt)

SPMOnt was developed  from  the  Software  Process  Ontology  Pattern  Language  (SPOPL) [Falbo et al. 2013] and addresses scope, time and costs planning and execution. Regarding costs, currently, only costs associated with human resources are considered. Figure 1 shows the SPMOnt conceptual model, represented by using OntoUML, a UML profile  that  enables  modelers  to  make  finer-grained  modeling  distinctions  between different types of classes and relations according to ontological distinctions put forth by the Unified Foundational Ontology [Guizzardi 2005]. Axioms formalize constraints not captured by the model. Due to space limitations, they are not presented in this paper.

A Software  Organization can  be  involved  in Projects . In this case, the organization is  committed to perform processes  and activities defined to the projects. There  are  two  types  of  processes  defined  to  a  Project: General  Project  Process and Specific Project Process . The first one is the global process defined to the Project. It is composed  of  specific process, allowing defining sub-processes . Specific Project Processes are composed of Project Activities , which can be Simple Project Activities or Composite Project Activities . Once a general project process is defined to a project, it is possible  to  plan  duration,  start  and  end  dates,  and  cost  of  the  process,  their  subprocesses and activities. The definition of duration, dates and cost to a Project Process gives  rise,  respectively,  to Process  with  Planned  Duration , Scheduled  Process and Process  with  Planned  Cost .  Similarly,  the  planning  of  duration,  dates  and  cost  of  a Project  Activity  gives  rise  to Activity  with  Planned  Duration , Scheduled  Activity and Activity with Planned Cost .

A Human Resource Allocation is  the  assignment  of  a  Scheduled  Activity  to  a Human Resource to perform a Human Role . The cost of a Human Resource Allocation is  based  on  the  cost  of  the  allocated  Human  Resource,  which  is  established  in  the Employment of that Human Resource.

A Project Activity can cause Activity Occurrences , which can be Simple Activity Occurrences or Composite Activity Occurrences . Human Resource Participation refers to the participation of a Human Resource in an Activity Occurrence.

A  Project  is  performed  to  produce Deliverables that  can  be Practical Results , which are composed by other Deliverables, or Work Packages.

Figure 1 -The Software Project Management Ontology conceptual model.

[FIGURE]

## 4. Infrastructure for Managing Semantic Documents for Software Project Management (IMSD-SPM)

The  Infrastructure  for  Managing  Semantic  Documents  (IMSD)  [Arantes  and  Falbo 2010]  provides general features to support  semantic  documentation  and  it  was developed  in  the  same  research  group  in  which  this  work  was  carried  out.  Thus,  we decided  to  extend  it  to  provide  features  to  support  project  management  aspects.  We analyzed IMSD  considering  two  different  perspectives: general,  which  concerns features useful for project management,  but also relevant to support semantic documentation in any domain; and specific, which regards features devoted to support time, scope and cost management aspects.

Regarding  the  general  perspective,  we  noticed  that  IMSD  supported  semantic documentation only in documents in text format. Since spreadsheets are very useful for recording  data  regarding  projects  (e.g.,  schedules  and  budgets),  we  identified  as improvement opportunity ( IO1 ) to extend IMSD to work with spreadsheets, expanding the scope of types of files that can be used as data sources.

Concerning the specific perspective, we considered the SPMOnt conceptualization to identify improvement opportunities to support project time, scope and cost management  activities. The  following improvement  opportunities  were identified:

( IO2 )  Planning  project  data  can  be  recorded  in  different  documents.  Provide  a consolidated view can help managers to have a global view about the project planning.

( IO3 )  It  is  important  to  know  the  dependencies  between  project  activities  and between  them  and  project  scope  items.  Thus,  provide  dependency  matrices  to represent these dependencies can ease visualizing dependencies (specially indirect and transitive dependencies) and analyzing impact of changes in the project.

( IO4 )  Project  monitoring  and  control  depend  on  information  about  progress  and comparison between planned and performed values.  Performance indicators can be useful  in  this  context,  because  they  quantitatively  represent  the  project  performance and also can be used to calculate estimates for the project conclusion. Thus, provide performance indicators can help managers to understand the project performance and identify  situations  that  need  corrective  actions.  Besides,  estimations  for  project conclusion provide a view about the project performance implications and allow the manager to make decisions about project continuation or interruption.

( IO5 )  During  a  project,  the  amount  of  information  to  be  manage  increases.  The exhibition  of  panels  and  graphics  containing  consolidated  information  about  the project, including the project performance over time, provides an overview about the project and helps its management.

( IO6 )  Several  projects  are  developed  in  a  software  organization.  It  is  important  to analyze  them  together  in  order  to  verify  discrepancies  and  investigate  their  causes. Thus, present performance indicators of several projects provides a global view of the projects and allows comparisons among them. Besides, the performance indicators can be used to analyze the behavior of the project management process used.

( IO7 )  Identification of non-conformities in documents produced during a project can be eased by quality assurance features. Checklists containing domain-related criteria can be used to automatically verify documents quality.

The identified improvement opportunities were implemented by extending and specializing IMSD, as discussed in the next two sections.

## 4.1 Supporting Project Management with Semantic Annotations in Spreadsheets

In  order to  address  IO1, we extended IMSD to work with spreadsheets and, then, we used SPMOnt as a basis to annotate spreadsheet and document templates related to the project management domain. The annotations are added into the templates resulting in semantic  templates (or  semantic  models)  that,  when  instantiated  (i.e.,  when  used  to create documents and spreadsheets), give rise to semantic documents .  Once annotated the templates, the documents produced using them are also annotated and can be used as data sources to IMSD. Spreadsheet templates were developed using the Open Document Format [Oasis 2015], since it is an open format, with great span. Annotations for cells were produced using Open Document Spreadsheet (ODS) in LibreOffice Calc.

For  spreadsheets  annotation,  the  syntax  and  instructions  for  annotating  text defined in IMSD are used to capture the cell content. Instructions  can  be  used  to  create instances,  relations  and  properties  based  on  the  ontology.  The  syntax  of  the  instance creation instruction is instance (arg ,concept, accessVariable) . This instruction creates the instance arg of the concept of SPMOnt. The SPMOnt was implemented in OWL and its URL is also informed in the concept field.  The  instruction result is a reference to the created instance and it is set on the accessVariable for later use. The syntax to create a relation is property (arg1, prop, arg2) . This instruction establishes a relation prop between the instances arg1 and arg2 . This instruction is also used to create properties and, in this case, it means that the value arg2 is set as the property prop of the instance arg1 .

For annotating spreadsheets templates, in the LibreOffice Calc, Custom Properties option is used to annotations recording and Styles and Formatting option is used  to  apply  annotations  to  cells.  The  first  thing  to  do  when  creating  a  semantic template is to create a custom property named Semantic Document and set its value to True .  This  way,  IMSD  can  identify  that  the  spreadsheet  is  a  semantic  document  and searches for semantic annotations. Each annotation must be recorded in a new custom property  whose  value  is  the  annotation  instruction.  For  each  annotation,  a  formatting style  must  be  created  and  related  to  the  custom  property  in  which  the  annotation  is recorded.  Thus,  when  a  formatting  style  is  applied  to  a  cell,  the  cell  is  annotated according to the annotation instruction recorded in the corresponding custom property.

Three  templates  related  to  project  management  were  created  and  annotated: Work  Breakdown  Structure (WBS),  a  text  document  that  presents  the  project  WBS, describing  the  project  deliverables; Project  Status  Report (PSR),  a  spreadsheet  that contains  information  regarding  planned  and  performed  schedule  and  budget;  and Human Resources Costs (HRC), a spreadsheet that contains information about costs of human resources. Semantic  documents  managed  by  IMSD  must  be  created  using  the semantic  templates.  This  allows  partial  automation  of  annotation  and  reduces  the amount of work that users need to do to create semantic documents.

Figure 2 illustrates the template of the Project Status Report spreadsheet, which contains information about project activities, dependencies, human resources allocated and participants, deliverables, and planned and actual dates and duration. As examples, the annotations related to cells of Human Resource and Duration columns are shown. The  first  part  of  the  human  resource  annotation  creates  instances  of  the Human Resource concept and stores in hr variable. The second part establishes the relationship allocates between  instances  of  Human  Resource  and  an  instance  of  Activity,  like  in SPMOnt,  in  which  the  relation allocates connects  a  human  resource  to  an  activity, meaning  that  the  human  resource  is  allocated  to  perform  the  activity.  The break tag means that one or various human resources can be related to one activity and they are separated  by  comma.  In  duration  annotation,  the  tag completeText indicates  that  the instruction refers to the complete text stored in the cell. The instruction means that the cell content will be set as the property Planned Duration of an instance of Activity.

When the project manager uses the semantic templates to create a WBS, PSR or HRC, the created documents or spreadsheets become semantic documents.  Then, they are  submitted  to  IMSD,  which  extracts  data  from  them  and  stores  in  OWL  files, allowing searching and retrieval, and also performs version control. It is important to notice that, although we created semantic templates related to the project management domain, spreadsheets annotation is a general feature, since by using it one can create semantic templates related to any domain. [[break with ',' into 'var']];

Figure 2 -Project Status Report template (a semantic template).

[FIGURE]

## 4.2  Supporting Software Project Scope, Time and Costs Management

In  order  to  address  IO2  to  IO7,  we  explored  SPMOnt  conceptualization  in  domainspecific features that were implemented to support scope, time and costs management activities. The features were implemented in an IMSD specialization named Infrastructure  for  Managing  Semantic  Documents  for  Software  Project  Management (IMSD-SPM).  When  a  project  starts,  the  manager  creates  the  semantic  documents related  to  project  planning  and  submit  them  to  IMSD-SPM.  During  the  project,  the manager updates the semantic documents with data related to project execution (or replanning)  and  submit  the  updated  documents  to  IMSD-SPM.  Table  1  presents  the implemented features and the IOs addressed by them. In each feature, some SPMOnt concepts,  relations  and  properties  were  explored.  After  Table  1,  some  features  are introduced and the use of SPMOnt in their context is discussed.

Table 1 -IMSD-SPM Features and Improvement Opportunities Addressed

| Feature                          | Short Description                                                                                                                   | Addressed IO   |
|----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| Simplified Project Plan          | Presents consolidated information about project scope, time and costs planning.                                                     | IO2            |
| Dependency Matrices              | Presents dependency matrices containing dependencies between activities and between activities and project deliverables.            | IO3            |
| Project Monitoring Panel         | Presents consolidated information about project execution, pointing out the differences between planned and performed values.       | IO4            |
| Performance Indicators           | Presents the current performance indicators of a project.                                                                           | IO4            |
| Estimates for Project Conclusion | Presents the optimistic, realistic and pessimistic estimates for project conclusion considering the current performance indicators. | IO4            |
| Project Performance History      | Presents project performance indicators and estimations over time.                                                                  | IO5            |
| Projects Comparison              | Presents performance indicators and estimations for conclusion related to several projects.                                         | IO6            |
| Quality Assurance                | Automatically evaluates documents and spreadsheets content quality considering a set of domain-related criteria.                    | IO7            |

## 4.2.1 The Simplified Project Plan and the Project Monitoring Panel

The Simplified Project Plan integrates data recorded in different semantic documents. Its  first  version  is  generated  when  the  first  versions  of  the  WBS,  PSR  and  HRC  are submitted to IMSD-SPM. New versions can be generated when data regarding planning are updated and new versions of the documents are submitted. The Simplified Project Plan presents information extracted from semantic documents and also data generated by the IMSD-SPM. For instance, activities planned start and end dates are determined by the IMSD-SPM considering activities planned duration, dependencies and the start date of the first activity. Also, IMSD-SPM calculates activities planned cost based on their planned durations and allocated human  resources allocated. For this, the conceptualization provided by SPMOnt is explored. For example, the relation between the planned costs of activities and costs of the human resources allocated to them comes from the relation based on the cost of between Activity with Planned Cost and Human Resource Allocation , which determines that the planned cost of an activity is based on the costs of the human resources allocated to it, and from the relation based on the cost of between Human  Resource  Allocation and Employment ,  which  determines  that  the cost  of  a  human  resource  allocation  is  based  on  the  cost  of  the  allocated  human resource.  Besides,  the  composition  relations  between  project  activities  and  processes, and axioms that address planned costs in these relations (the planned cost of an activity is the sum of the planned costs of the activities that compose it, and the planned cost of a process is the sum of the planned costs of its activities) allow inferring that the total planned cost of the general process defined to the project is the sum of planned costs of all  activities  that  compose  the  process.  Finally,  considering  that,  currently,  only  costs related  to  human  resources  are  considered,  it  is  possible  to  conclude  that  the  project planned cost is equal to the planned cost of the general process defined to it. Figure 3 shows  fragments  of  WBS,  PSR  and  HRC  semantic  documents  submitted  to  IMSDSPM. Ellipses and arrows are used to highlight examples of related information.

Figure 3 -Semantic documents fragments: (a) WBS, (b) HRC, (c) PSR.

[FIGURE]

A fragment  of  the  Simplified  Project  Plan  generated  based  on  the  documents shown in Figure 3 is depicted in Figure 4. Data inside solid ellipses are examples of data extracted  from  semantic  documents.  Data  inside  dotted  ellipses  are  examples  of  data calculated by IMSD-SPM by exploring the SPMOnt conceptualization. To ease the plan visualization, a Gantt Graph is also provided (not shown in Figure 4).

Figure 4 -Simplified Project Plan fragment.

[FIGURE]

During the project, the manager  submits new  versions of the semantic documents  containing  data  regarding  project  execution.  Based  on  their  content  and considering  SPMOnt  conceptualization,  IMSD-SPM  provides  a Project  Monitoring Panel presenting  planned  and  performed  values  and  the  difference  between  them.  A Gantt Graph showing planned and performed values is also exhibited. Figure 5 presents a Project Monitoring Panel fragment. For sake of legibility some columns were omitted. The variations between planned and performed values are presented in the last columns.

Figure 5 -Project Monitoring Panel fragment.

[FIGURE]

For calculating deviations between planned and performed values, the traceability between  planned  processes  and  its  executions  and  between  planned activities and its executions was explored in SPMOnt. The traceability is established by the  relationships caused  by between Project  Process and Process  Occurrence, and between Project Activity and Activity Occurrence . These relationships allow identifying start and  end  planned  dates for processes and  activities ( plannedStartDate and plannedEndDate of Scheduled Process and Scheduled Activity ) ; their planned duration and cost ( duration and cost of Process with Planned Duration, Process with Planned Cost, Activity with Planned Duration and Activity with Planned Cost ); and their actual duration and cost ( duration and cost of Process Occurrence and Activity Occurrence ).

Since activities planned and actual costs are respectively related to the activities human  resources  allocations and  human  resources  participations, the caused  by relationship  between Human Resource Participation and Human Resource Allocation was also explored. Caused by allows relating a participation to the allocation that cause it  and,  then,  comparing  planned  values  ( duration and cost  properties of Human Resource  Allocation )  with  actual  values  ( duration and cost of Human  Resource Participation ).

## 4.2.2 Dependency Matrices

Dependency  relations  between  activities  and  between  them  and  scope  items  are important  in  the  project  management  context  and  can  be  represented  by  means  of dependency matrices. However, a lot of human effort is usually required to create and maintain these matrices.

In the semantic documentation context, relations can be established in semantic templates by using semantic annotations. Thus, data recorded in the semantic documents  are  captured  by  IMSD-SPM  and  the  changes  made  in  the  dependencies along  the  project  are  propagated  when  updated  semantic  documents  are  submitted  to IMSD-SPM.  Since the semantic global model of the semantic repository is generated by  IMSD-SPM, the dependencies established in each semantic document, as well the ones between different documents, can be known.

Dependency  relations  established  in  semantic  templates  and  in  its  instances (semantic documents) come from the relation depends on between Project Activities and the relation is to produce between Project Activity and Work Package . Figure 6 presents a fragment of a dependency matrix indicating dependencies between WBS items (first column) and project activities.

Figure 6 -Dependency Matrix fragment.

[FIGURE]

## 4.2.3 Performance Indicators, Estimates for Project Conclusion and Project Performance History

The Project Monitoring Panel allows managers to analyze in details differences between planned and performed values. However, it is also important to understand the project performance  as  a  whole.  Thus,  IMSD-SPM  calculates  SPI  and  CPI,  indicators  that quantitatively represent the project performance. SPI and CPI are calculated from three variables:  Planned Value (cost planned in the project baseline to the work to be done until a certain date), Earned Value (planned cost to the work done until that date), and Actual Cost (actual cost of the work  done) [Fleming and Koppelman  1999]. Considering SPMOnt conceptualization, Planned Value is the sum of planned costs of activities ( cost property  of Activity  with  Planned  Cost )  whose plannedEndDate of Scheduled  Activity is  smaller  than  or  equal  to  the  considered  date  for  calculating  the indicators.  Earned  Value  is  the  sum  of  planned  costs  of  activities  ( cost property  of Activity  with  Planned  Cost )  that  caused  the Activity  Occurrences whose endDate is smaller than or equal to the considered date. Actual Cost, in turn, is the sum of actual costs  of  activities  ( cost properties  of Activity  Occurrence )  whose endDate is  smaller than or equal to the considered date. From SPI and CPI it is possible to determine time and cost estimates for the project conclusion. IMSD-SPM provides optimistic, realistic and pessimistic estimates [Fleming and Koppelman  1999]. Figure 7 illustrates fragments of IMSD-SPM screens showing values calculated to (a) SPI and CPI and (b) estimates.

Figure 7 -Screens showing (a) SPI and CPI and (b) Estimates for Conclusion.

[FIGURE]

The  project  performance  can  chance  along  time.  Thus,  a  performance  history showing performance indicators over time helps the manager to understand the project performance behavior, identify performance improvements or deteriorations, investigate causes, and make decisions. IMSD-SPM provides a graph of SPI and CPI values over time  and  also  displays  the  history  of  optimistic,  realistic  and  pessimistic  estimates. Figure 8 shows an example of graph depicting a project performance history provided by IMSD-SPM.

Figure 8 -Project Performance History.

[FIGURE]

## 5 . Proposal Evaluation

To evaluate the proposal, we conducted an experimental study. The purpose of the study was  to  verify  if  IMSD-SPM  is  able  to  properly  support  scope,  time  and  costs management  activities.    For  this,  two  indicators  were  considered:  (a)  templates adequacy  and  (b)  features  utility.  Seven  graduate  students  and  one  undergraduate student  participated  in  the  study.  All  of  them  have  theoretical  knowledge  of  project management  and  practical  experience  in  projects.  During  the  study,  the  researcher presented information related to a project. Based on that, each participant planned the project scope, schedule and cost and created WBS, PSR and HRC semantic documents from semantic templates. Then, some situations concerning the project execution were introduced  by  the  researcher  (e.g.,  someone  in  the  project  got  sick  and  had  to  be replaced, the supplier did not deliver material on time impacting on project activities, some  activities  took  more  than  the  planned  time,  etc.).  The  participants  updated  the semantic documents  with  data about project execution.  The  produced  semantic documents were submitted them to  IMSD-SPM and the participants  used  the  IMSDSPM features.

For each semantic template, the participants were asked to evaluate its adequacy. All the templates were evaluated as adequate for most of the participants. Some of them considered the templates partially adequate . In the case of PSR e HRC, the comments presented  by  the  participants  who  considered  the  templates  partially  adequate  were outside  the  scope  of  this  work  (e.g.,  record  information  related  to  human  resources competences and abilities) or referred to operational improvements (e.g., automatic data generation).  As  for  the  WBS  template,  the  reasons  put  by  the  participants  who considered the template partially adequate were related to lack of graphic representation.

For each feature provided by IMSD-SPM the participants were asked to evaluate its utility. 5 out 8 were evaluated as very useful or useful by 100% of participants. The other 3 were considered useful or very useful by at least 75% of participants.

The participants were also asked to compare the benefits of using ISDM-SPM versus  the  ones  of  using  traditional  documents.  62,5%  answered  that  ISDM-SPM provides much more benefits and 37,5% answered that it provides more benefits.

The study results can be understood  as  initial  evidences  that  the  use  of  IMSDSPM as a way to support project time, scope and cost management is feasible. However, due to study limitations (e.g., the small number of participants, the sample homogeneity and the use of a controlled environment), the results cannot be generalized. Therefore, the preliminary results obtained in the study must be confirmed (or not) in additional studies,  involving  more  participants,  with  different  profiles.  In  addition,  other  studies types (e.g. case studies) can also contribute to a better evaluation.

## 6. Related Works

As discussed in Section 2, there are some initiatives involving semantic annotation that support project management aspects. There are some similarities between our work and the proposals we found in the systematic review. However, there are also differences.

As for similarities, like IMSD-SPM, four proposals use domain ontologies as a basis  to  annotations  and  provide  general  features  for  managing  semantic  content (annotation,  storage,  indexing  and  retrieving).  Regarding  technologies  used,  IMSDSPM was built using  Java  programming  language,  Postgres  database  and  Subversion version  control  system.  Ontology  design  and  implementation  were  made  using  Web Ontology Language (OWL) and the SPARQL language was used to perform queries on ontologies  and  semantic  repositories.  Some  proposals  found  in  the  SLR  use  similar technologies,  such  as  Subversion  to  versioning  control  and  Resource  Description Framework (RDF), which is similar to OWL, to data description and modelling.

The main differences between our proposal and the ones found in the systematic review  concern  the  types  of  annotated  files,  the  annotation  type  and  the  project management  knowledge  areas  supported.  Regarding  types  of  files,  the  proposals annotate  web  pages,  electronic  forums,  pdf  and  text  documents.  IMSD-SPM  also annotates  text  documents,  but  it  is  the  only  one  to  annotate  spreadsheets.  As  for annotation type, all initiatives adopt manual annotation. IMSD-SPM, in contrast, uses semantic  templates  to  automatically  annotate  documents  and  spreadsheets  created  by users.   By doing this, users do not need to annotate files, because annotated instances of documents  are generated from annotated templates. Regarding knowledge  areas supported, the proposals support aspects related to Scope, Integration, Communication and Stakeholder Management. IMSD-SPM, in turn, deals with aspects related to Scope, Time and Costs Management.

IMSD-SPM  differs  from  the  proposals  investigated  in  [Bastos et  al. 2015] mainly  due  to  the  features  to  support  project  management  activities,  obtained  by exploring the SPMOnt conceptualization in functionalities that help managers to plan, monitor and control projects.  Although the proposals support some project management aspects,  the  domain  ontologies  used  by  them  do  not  address  aspects  that  allow comparing project planning and execution. Also, none proposal provides indicators or estimates to help project managers to monitor projects performance. Summarizing, by exploring  the  SPMOnt  conceptualization,  domain-specific  features  are  provided  by IMSD-SPM, better supporting project management activities.

## 7. Final Considerations

Text documents and spreadsheets are often used in the context of project management. They  are  used  to  record  information  about  projects  and,  usually,  information  is distributed  in  several  documents.  Thus,  obtain  consolidated  information  about  the project and its progress demands effort and is prone to fails.

Considering  this  scenario,  in  this  paper  we  presented  a  proposal  that  applies semantic  documentation  to  software  project  management,  supporting  scope,  time  and cost management aspects. The proposal was implemented as an extension of the IMSD [Arantes  and  Falbo  2010]  that  enables  semantic  annotation  of  spreadsheets,  and  as  a specialization  of  IMSD,  the  IMSD-SPM,  which  provides  domain-related  features defined based on the Software Project Management Ontology.

The main contributions of this work are: (i) the IMSD extension and the IMSDSPM, (ii) the Software Project Management Ontology, and (iii) the systematic literature review  that  investigated  the  use  of  semantic  annotation  in  the  project  management domain [Bastos et al. 2015]. It is worth noting that although IMSD-SPM is proposed to the  software  project  management  domain  (SMPOnt  was  developed  from  a  software process ontology), it can also be useful for project management in other domains.

It is important to point out that problems to retrieve information from documents and spreadsheets could be also addressed by approaches such as corporative architectures and information systems. However, although these approaches are capable of dealing with information recording and extraction, they imply in modifying the way organizations and people perform activities, since they replace documents by information  systems.  Semantic  documentation  can  be  considered  an  advantageous approach because it accesses information recorded in documents, allowing organizations  and  people  to  keep  the  way  they  perform  activities,  i.e.,  recording information in documents.

As future works, we plan to carry out other studies to evaluate the proposal, to extend SPMOnt and use semantic documentation to support other project management areas.  Also,  we  intend  to  enable  IMSD  to  annotate  images.  As  a  result,  it  will  be possible, for example, to represent WBS graphically and annotate it. Currently, we are working on integrating IMSD-SPM and project management tools (DotProject and MSProject). By doing this, organizations that use these tools can also benefit from IMSDSPM features that are not available from other tools used by them (e.g., performance history, estimates and quality assurance).

## Acknowledgment

This research is  funded  by  the  Brazilian  Research  Funding  Agency CNPq (Processes 485368/2013-7 and 461777/2014-2).

## References

ARANTES, L. O. and FALBO, R. A.  (2010)  "An infrastructure for managing semantic documents", In: Joint 5th VORTE and MOST Workshop, p. 235-244.

- BASTOS,  E.  C.,  BARCELLOS,  M.  P.  and  FALBO,  R.  A.  (2015)    "Exploring Ontologies for Semantic Documentation in Project Management", In: ONTOBRAS 2015, São Paulo, Brasil, p. 34 - 45.
- BERNERS-LEE, T., HENDLER, J. and  LASSILA,  O.  The  semantic  web.  Scientific American: 34-43 p. 2001.
- BRUGGEMANN,  B.  M.,  HOLZ,  K.-P.  and  MOLKENTHIN,  F.  (2000)    "Semantic documentation in engineering", In: Eighth International Conference on Computing in Civil and Building Engineering,  California, USA, p. 828-835.
- ELKAFFAS, S. M. and WAGIH, A. S.  (2013)  "Use of Semantic Wiki as a Capturing Tool  for  Lessons  Learned  in  Project  Management",  In:  Science  and  Information Conference, London, UK,   October 7-9, 2013.
- FALBO, R. A., BARCELLOS, M. P., NARDI, J. C., GUIZZARDI, G. et  al. (2013) "Organizing  Ontology  Design  Patterns  as  Ontology  Pattern  Languages",  In:  10th European Semantic Web Conference -ESWC 2013,  France, p. 61-75.
- FLEMING, Q. W. and KOPPELMAN, J. M. (1999), Earned value Project Management, Project Management Institute, 2 nd edition.
- GUIZZARDI, G. (2005) "Ontological Foundations for Structural Conceptual Models", ISBN 90-75176-81-3, Universal Press, The Netherlands, 2005.
- LOUKIS, E. N. (2007) "An ontology for G2G collaboration in public policy making, implementation and evaluation", Artificial Intelligence and Law, v. 15, n. 1, p. 19-48.
- LU, Q.,  CHEN, M. and WANG, Z.  (2008)  "A semantic annotation based software knowledge  sharing  space",  In:  IFIP  International  Conference  on  Network  and Parallel Computing (NPC), China, p. 504 - 509.
- NAKATSUKA,  K.  and  ISHIDA,  T.  (2006) "Content management for interorganizational  projects  using  e-mail  metaphor",  In:  International  Symposium  on Applications and the Internet (SAINT),  Phoenix, Arizona, USA, p. 202-205.
- OASIS.  Open  Document  Format  for  Office  Applications.      Visited  in:  09  jul.  2015, https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/tc\_home.php?wg\_abbrev=office.
- PMI (2013), A guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBoK), Project Management Institute, 5 th edition.
- PRESSMAN, R. S. (2011), Engenharia de Software, McGraw Hill, 7 th edition.
- SICILIA,  M.  (2006)  "Metadata,  semantics and ontology: providing meaning  to information resources", International Journal of Metadata, Semantics and Ontologies, v. 1, n. 1, p. 83-86.
- TALAŠ, J., GREGAR, T. and PITNER, T. (2011)  "Semantic wiki in environmental project management", IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology, 359 AICT,  Brno, Czech Republic, p. 437-444.
- VILLALOBOS,  J.,  SANABRIA,  S.  and  CACERES,  R.  (2011)  "Activity  scheduling through gantt charts in an ms excel spreadsheet", Revista Facultad de Ingenieria, n. 61, p. 132-145.
